Welcome, Mike. We can see you there.
Uh, we have Environment Southland with us as well.
We can see the team there, from the deep south.
Welcome to the Environment Select Committee this morning.
Uh, look, you have got, 15
minutes with us. So look, we'll hand it over to you to talk us through your
submission and the main points, and then we'll open up for questions.
And just for those following along today online, we are in two
subcommittees today. So we have Subcommittee A and we have
Subcommittee B. So, if there was a particular,
submission you wanted to hear, just have a look on those different subcommittees.
But look, I'll hand it over to you, to Environment Southland.
Uh, you can hear us all right?
Yes, we can hear you. Thank you.
Uh, that's very good. Uh, look, thank you chair and members of the
committee for the opportunity to present, Southland's perspective on these
important reforms. My name is Jeremy McIhal, chair
of Environment Southland. With me are Phil
Morrison, our deputy chair, and Hayley Fitchett, our
general manager of strategy and reg- regulation.
We're supported by senior staff, who can assist with technical matters
if required. Environment Southland is responsible for
implementing national direction on, on the ground, across
freshwater, land use, natural hazards, and flood
protection, working in enduring partnership with mana
whenua and our communities. With that
context, I'll hand to our deputy chair, Phil Morrison, to outline the key
issues we wish to highlight today.
Uh, thank you. So we support the intent of these
reforms. The current system is too slow, too complex, and
not delivering the outcomes New Zealand needs.
But our central message is this: if these bills are not
adjusted in a small number of critical areas, they risk
replacing one set of problems with another set, more
complex, less coherent, and harder to make workable
in practice. You have our full written submission.
Today, we will focus on four issues we believe are
decisive to whether this s- system
succeeds or fails. Issue one, system
fragmentation. The split between the planning
bill and the natural environment bill creates a structural
risk. On paper, the system is designed as a
coherent funnel with aligned goals, national direction,
and integrated plans. However, there is no single clear
purpose across both bills to guide how these
systems should operate together.
In practice, councils will be required to operate two
legislative systems at once, each with potentially
different purposes, tools, and decision pathways.
If integration is not explicitly required and
enforced, fragmentation will occur at three
levels: at strategic planning level, at
plan-making level, and most critically, at the consenting
interface. And when that happens, the burden does not sit
with central government. It sits with councils and communities
trying to reconcile conflicting signals.
That will introduce delay, cost, and litigation,
exactly what this reform is trying to remove.
So our position is simple. If two acts proceed,
integration must be a binding system principle,
not an assumption.
Issue two, centralization and regional workability.
We support strong national direction.
Clear environmental limits and consistent standards are
necessary. We also strongly support regional spatial
planning. But the f- the bills go further
than direction. They shift
control. National instruments will determine
most key settings, leaving limited space for regional
judgment. The risk is not
theoretical. We have seen in the past that highly prescribed
national frameworks can be difficult to
implement, expensive to administer, and
poorly adapted to regional conditions.
In Southland, this matters.
We are a resource-dependent region, where economy,
environment, and infrastructure are tightly coupled with
specific challenges such as wetland loss and
cumulative land use effects. We have demonstrated
that regional collaboration works, for example, through our intensive winter
grazing work with stakeholders. This led to changes that made
regulation more workable while still achieving environmental
outcomes. So if regional flexibility is too
constrained, councils will be held accountable for outcomes
that they no longer have the tools to influence.
That represents a design failure, not an
implementation failure.
Issue three, environmental limits and
pathways. We strongly support limits.
They are essential. But limits alone do not improve environmental
outcomes. Limits require pathways,
data, staging, tools, and time to
transition. Many critical elements, such as
methodologies and management units, are yet to be
defined, and in areas like freshwater, limits are not
yet supported by complete or consistent
data. Without flexibility in how limits are applied and
phased, we risk creating a system that is technically
sound but lacks workability in
practice.This creates a risk that limits are either
set too conservatively, delaying outcomes, or too
ambitiously, which makes them unworkable.
And neither of those outcomes builds confidence.
We also note that prioritising caps ahead of broader
tools such as catchment act- action plans
risks undermining the very approaches that have proven effective in
regions like ours. So we need a system that enables
progress towards limits, not just compliance
with limits. Issue four,
regulatory relief. While we recognise the intent
of regulatory relief, the proposal raises serious
equity and practical concerns. It introduces
a mechanism that effectively compensates for
environmental protections on a property by property
basis, and this risks three outcomes.
First, it undermines spatial planning by potentially
fragmenting decisions. Second, the risk of creating
inequity between landowners. And third, placing significant
and uncertain financial liability on councils and rate
payers.
For regions like Southland with a small rating base, that exposure
is significant.
In effect, the system begins to treat environmental protection as a
cost to be offset rather than a foundation to be
maintained. And that is a fundamental shift in the
logic of the system, and it risks weakening public
trust in that system. So we recommend that these
provisions be reconsidered and that alternative mechanisms,
potentially outside the core system, be explored to
incentivise positive environmental actions such as
biodiversity and wetland restoration.
To round out the points made by Councillor Morrison, a one size fits
all approach risks increasing rather than decreasing regulatory
workload. We would caution the committee about accepting the
idea that the bills, as drafted, will significantly reduce
regulatory workload for both the regulated and the
regulator. Part of the bills, including the registration of
permitted activities and the accompanying workload, will shift effort
and expense rather than remove it.
In summary, this reform is ambitious and
necessary, but its success will depend less on its intent
and more on whether the system is coherent, integrated and
workable in practice. We've highlighted four issues
today: system in- integration, appropriate
centralization, workable environmental limits, and regulatory
relief. These are not peripheral issues, they are system
defining choices. If addressed well, this reform can
succeed. If not, we risk embedding a new generation of
complexity into the system, one that is harder to implement
and harder for communities to trust.
Thank you, and we welcome your questions.
Look, thank you very much for that submission.
Uh, very clear, and a, a really well written submission, so we
appreciate your time on that. Uh, look, we've got a couple of questions.
Uh, we'll move to Priyanka first.
Thank you. Um, and thanks for your submission today.
Um, I had a quick question around environmental limits and the point
that you've made in your submit- written submission, that you
support regional councils a- and, you know, feel that they're best
placed to set, environmental limits and
implement them. We've had other submitters make the point
around, nationwide consistency and the
fact that this may not lead to nationwide
consistency, and some asking for some sort
of a national framework within which regional councils have some
flexibility to make changes, that are more
suited to their area. What would your thoughts be on something like
that?
Thank you for the question. I'll direct this question to Karen Wilson,
who's our General Manager of Science.
Um, so I would, concur with the idea
that, I guess, nationally consistent frameworks are not going to
lead to nationally consistent outcomes.
Um, the environments that they get applied to, can
be very different, across the country.
So in order to sort of achieve a similar level of outcome,
there needs to be taken into account the localized,
the localized system. So yeah, I would concur with the other
submissions, on that one.
So you would agree that some sort of a nationwide framework
within which you can make some changes would be better than just regional
councils setting limits?
Agreed.
Okay. Thank you.
And David McLeod.
Yes. And thank you, also for the submission that you've provided.
Um, you mentioned about regulatory relief.
It's a, it's a very common, submission that's been brought before us
itself. Um, and of course it's based on the premise of,
any new, imposition placed on a, on a landowner,
is not left out of pocket. They don't go backwards negatively, a, a major
imposition. Um, what, what in your mind are some of the solutions?
You didn't quite get to the solutions.
You, you spoke about that you don't believe it should be in, within this.
Could you t- talk, talk about that a bit more?
Uh, thank you for your question. Um, we spoke in our submission, about
potentially looking at a positively framed system
rather... So, in terms of incentivization-
Uh, for improvements to particular aspects such
as biodiversity, the enhancement of wetlands.
Uh, wetland loss, as we've identified in our submission as a, as a critical
concern and matter within Southland.
We are leaning in very heavily into non-regulatory methods.
But the addition of positively framed
incentivization tools within a regulatory framework we
feel could be, a substantial improvement to the
system to further double down on the good work that
our communities, our farming communities, our runanga
are already making in the restoration enhancement,
of, of wetlands, for example. Similarly with other forms
of biodiversity in Southland.
Thank you.
Thank you. And one last question from Steve Abel.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just wanted you to expand on your comments regarding
regulatory relief. You say that it's, not
workable, that it seems to set councils up to
fail, and risks undermining the natural environment.
I wonder if you can expand on some of those comments, please.
Certainly. Some of my
colleagues
Oh, we seem to have lost your audio there.
Um.
Uh, we still can't hear you.
No.
Oh, okay. Um.
Um, we can't hear you.
No? Okay. Um.
Oh, there we go. If you can move a bit closer, maybe we might be able to hear you
to the speaker.
Okay. Just one moment. Move a bit closer.
There we go. We can hear you, yeah.
Yes. Yeah, okay. Otherwise I was hoping that Mike would jump in online.
Um, so the questions are on the workability of regulatory
relief. The challenge in Southland is that we have such a small
ratings base that covers a substantial,
area, and
we would have to make extraordinarily difficult trade-off
choices, because of the cost, of
potentially for regulatory relief to us, either through direct
financial cost or the opportunity cost of, for example, if we would use
ratings relief. So, you know, co- re- revenue
forgone. Um, and so we would be concerned
that we wouldn't then be able to fulfill our statutory
obligations with respect of things like the protection of
biodiversity, for example. Um, and it would be, in a
governance sense, extraordinarily difficult.
Is there anything that my colleagues would like to add on that?
I think central from all of...
The only, only thought I would add is that if, that once you introduce
regulatory relief, there's an asymmetry in the system in that there's no provision
for environmental relief, and at some point in the future
there is potential for, government to
potentially consider rebalancing that asymmetry by introducing the concept
of environmental relief as well. And I think longer term, that's something that we
need to take account of and consider, the potential for that kind
of subsequent intervention.
Look, thank you. Uh, we have met time, but we
have many questions, but we do appreciate, a very thorough
and insightful submission, you know, covering the, the many areas there
for consideration. So thank you to you and your team
today.
Uh, look, thanks, thanks for the opportunity to, to speak to you.
And, and just in closing, I would just like to say, look, highly
important this work, but it needs to
take time to get it right. Make sure we get it right, and,
if it takes a bit longer, the timelines don't matter
here. It's a once in generation change, so that's all I'd like to say.
So thanks again for the opportunity.
Look, no, we appreciate that, and we are very aware of the significance of, of this
reform, so thank you.
Thank you.
So we now move to our next submitter, New Zealand Notable
Trees Trust, who I can see there. Uh,
Brad, welcome to the select committee this morning.
Look, you have 15 minutes with us, so we will pass it over to you to
talk us through your submission, and then we'll open up for
questions.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair and members of the committee for the,
opportunity to, appear today.
My name is Brad Kadvalider, and I'm speaking on behalf of the New Zealand
Notable Trees Trust. The trust works
nationally to identify and record and support the
protection of Aotearoa, New Zealand's historic and
notable trees, working with landowners,
territorial authorities, and
community. Our submission focuses
specifically on how the proposed resource management
reforms may affect the identification and protection of
historic and notable trees.
Trees in general provide a broad range of well-documented
benefits. They improve air quality, moderate
urban heat, support biodiversity,
and contribute to the physical and wellbeing of our
communities. However, historic and
notable trees occupy a very special category
within the wider urban forest. These are often
mature or veteran specimens with exception...
exceptional age, size, rarity,
cultural association, or landscape
prominence. Some are early plantings
linked to the history of settlement.
Others are remarkable indigenous specimens representing
ecological commu- continuity.
Unlike buildings and infrastructure, a mature tree
cannot simply be replaced.
When a historic or notable tree is lost-
The accumulated ecological landscape and heritage
values developed over decades or
centuries are permanently lost.
These trees therefore function as a long-term
environmental and cultural infrastructure within
our communities.
It is also worth noting that New Zealand contains many tree
specimens that are exceptional by international
standards. Our cool temperate climate has allowed
a, a number of early exotic plantings to reach dimensions rarely
seen within their natural ranges.
At the same time, mature indigenous trees attract significant
international attention because New Zealand's native flora is
globally distinctive. Together,
these trees form what is effectively a living environmental
and cultural collection across the
country. Their protection is therefore not simply a
local amenity issue, it's part of the long-term
stewardship of nationally si- significant
natural assets.
Protection of notable trees has been part of New Zealand's planning system for
decades. Most scheduled trees have been
identified and protected with landowner
knowledge, and in many cases were nominated by
landowners themselves, often as a legacy for future
generations.
Properties containing protected trees
are commonly purchased in full knowledge of those
protections.
This means protection is not generally an unexpected
regulatory imposition,
it is an established part of the planning framework attached
to those properties.
Ultimately, the trust's concerns is not whether
reform occurs, but how it is
implemented. There are three areas of concern
the trust wish to highlight.
Firstly, the regulatory relief provisions.
If notable tree scheduling were to trigger regulatory
relief mechanisms, councils may face
fiscal and legal exposure. Over time,
that
risk could discourage councils from retaining or introducing
notable tree protections.
Secondly, institutional responsibility.
The current Resource Management Act clearly empowers territorial
authorities to identify and protect
historic and notable trees through district
plans.
The proposed legislation introduces uncertainty about
whether this function remains clearly embedded in the planning
system.
And our third concern, that there is a potential
mismatch with heritage
frameworks. Many notable trees are
protected not only for historic heritage
reasons, but also for botanical,
ecological, landscape and amenity values.
If protection were to rely primarily on heritage
legislation, there is a risk that many currently
protected trees would fall outside that
framework.
There is also a practical governance issue.
New Zealand currently does not have a consolidated national
inventory of legally protected historic and
notable trees. Protection
currently occurs through district plan schedules maintained
independently
by territorial authorities. Without a
verified national baseline identifying
how many trees are protected, where they are protected, and
the values for which they are recognized, it is difficult to assess
the scale of any function transfer or
reform.
Structural reform of this nature should proceed on the basis of a
clearly established evidential foundation.
The trust therefore recommends three key actions.
Firstly, the legislation should explicitly
retain statutory provisions, enabling territorial
authorities to identify and schedule notable
trees, and ensure that regulatory relief mechanisms
do not discourage councils from retaining or
introducing those protections.
Secondly, existing district plan schedules
should transition into the new framework without loss
of protection.
And lastly, if responsibility for notable tree
protection is to be altered or centralized, this
should occur only after a nationally coordinated
audit establishes a clear baseline of the
protected estate.
In closing, historic and notable trees are
long-lived public assets. Their protection is
proportionate, widely understood, and embedded in New
Zealand's planning practice. The trust's
central point is simply that reform should strengthen, not
inadvertently weaken, those long-standing protections.
With appropriate legislative
clarification, these reforms present an opportunity to
strengthen consistency, transparency, and
long-term stewardship of the historic and notable trees in our
communitiesThank you very much for the opportunity to,
present today. I'd be happy to answer any questions from the
committee. Thank you.
Well, thank you, Brad. And, and thank you for your submission,
because obviously it's a very, interesting area-
Thank you
... that we haven't traversed actually, fully yet.
So look, Steve has got a question, so we'll go
first to Steve Abel.
Yeah. Thank you so much. A, a really excellent submission,
and you made it very clear. I, I wonder
would it be correct to reflect that, the great
value that those notable trees offer
the community, I think particularly in urban environments,
is an excellent example of a commons,
if you like. Um, a thing that has
broad community value for its provision of beauty,
shade, ecology, history, and
therefore something that, that
benefits us all
and can't be captured by the simple idea
of, the private property rights of the person on
whose property the tree stands when that tree has
outlived them and will outlive them.
Um,
so this is a sort of an excellent example of why we need to have
a protect- a special status for these nationally significant
trees.
Yes, absolutely. The, the, the, the values of, of
these trees extend well beyond, the, the property
boundaries. Uh, the community absolutely shares, in
the stories of those trees and, they,
they're, often... You know,
when these trees come under threat, communities rise up, so
it shows really the, the significance the co- community
hold in the, these individual trees.
Can I do a quick sup on it, Madam Chair?
We, we... Yeah, a quick sup.
It's very quick. Uh, you've talked about a consolidated national inve-
inventory.
Yes.
Do you think that's a thing we should do anyway, that that would be hugely
beneficial? Because I realize that these schedules are held in disparate
spaces.
Yes, yes. We, we've tried to, you know, get councils
to bring, you know, bring them together but, you know, they all basically
work in- independently. Uh, trying to,
search across the various district plans is, is quite a, an
onerous task. Some of the listings
include avenues, so they might include,
90 trees in a, a single line listing-
True
... whereas another line listing would be one, a
tree.
Yes.
And the other, the other aspect is that,
some of these trees have, are listed for
historic purposes and others for their general
amenity.
Yes.
So it's quite a... Yeah.
Thank you. Well, now over to Kevin Maxwell.
I think, I think that would be it. Thank you, Chair.
Uh, Brad, I... In
your comment you're saying, you know, it goes, the value of these trees goes well
beyond, the private property, and as a community shares in the
value. I'm aware of,
trees being cut down before they hit the height
in a place called Papamoa of, what would become automatically
listed as a, a notable tree. Now,
would you think that if a property owner who, had, say, a
Norfolk Pine could see themselves being,
compensated for what you've called the community sharing in the value through
regulatory relief might incentivize people to see, these
trees, as value to them as well, be
recognized by the community, not just the cost being
held by the property owner?
Well, firstly, I'm not really aware that, that, there
is a local authority that automatically protects the tree
Uh, this is in, in the Tauranga City Council, this is what used to happen.
It doesn't happen anymore, I grant you.
Right. Yes.
But it used to happen.
Yeah. Yeah. That's right.
It's-
That, that gen- general prote- tree protection is, is no longer,
possible for local authorities, but, um-
But this is my point. If it was to be, uh...
If there was to be a compensation, people might see the value in, in allowing these
trees to become, recognized on a list that the
community shares.
Uh, yes, I guess that would be correct.
Uh, how other local authorities compensate,
landowners as they share in the maintenance and inspection of those trees.
So there are, you know, many ways councils can
incentivize.
Look, thank you very much, Brad, for your submission today.
Uh, we have met time. Uh, we appreciate your time,
and that perspective, obviously on
protecting our trees. Uh, very important submission, so thank you
very much for that. We appreciate it.
Thank you very much for the time.
Bye.
So now we move to our next submitter, the
Hastings District Council.
And I can see a couple of familiar faces there- ...
from Hastings. Welcome. Welcome to the select
committee this morning. Uh, look, you've got 15 minutes with us,
so, we'll hand it over to you to talk us through your submission,
and then we'll open up for questions.
So over to you.
Uh, morning, and thank you for allowing us to add to what I understand is in
excess of four hundred hours of submissions.
Um, so we will try and keep this brief, and we, we look forward to receiving your
questions at the end. Um, so I'm Wendy Shullam of the Hastings
District Council, and to my right is Caleb Sutton, who is our
environmental consents manager here at HDC.
Um, thank you first of all for the opportunity to speak today, and
as you likely have gathered, I am appearing on behalf of the Hastings District
Council. Um, our council is, very
supportive in principle, and especially with the efficient and
cost-effective planning and resource management system and the
government's resource management reform, package
objectives. They align really well with what we believe as well,
particularly with relation to the regional spatial
plans. Um, so while we are broadly supportive, our
submission today is going to focus on a few key concerns with the proposed
bills. Um, and these, these topics will cover things like
climate change, regional spatial planning, transitional
arrangements, and the practicality of the new system for councils
and communities. So what I'd like to do today is just
briefly connect those concerns to what that actually means for
us on the ground in terms of communities like
Hastings. Uh, at present, we understand that
approximately sixty-one percent of New Zealand is in some form of
recovery, and while we are three years on from Cyclone Gabrielle
here in Heretaunga, the impact is still significant, and it
still scars our lands and people. Um, and it's for that
reason that I really want to begin today with a mention of the absence of
any explicit reference to climate change within the goals of the
bills. Um, this is a significant concern for
Hastings, as many of our recent decisions have relied
heavily on climate-related considerations.
In our view, climate change is not a peripheral issue for
planning, it's central. Uh, climate change underpi-
underpins for us coastal hazards across the Hawke's Bay
coastline, and it is increasingly determining where
and how we develop safely. In practical terms,
it's about whether we are enabling homes, infrastructure, and
investment in places that will still be safe and viable
in thirty to fifty years' time. Without climate change
explicitly recognized as a goal, we do not believe that the
regional spatial plans can provide the strategic direction the
legislation intends.
And without national direction, we risk fragmented and inconsistent
responses, repeating the piecemeal outcomes under previous
legislation, and that's something we would like to help avoid.
Uh, that means that we could end up in situations where different regions make
different calls about risk, and in some cases, that could mean
continuing allow- allowing development in areas that will
ultimately put people and property in harm's
way. So while we ins- support the intent of the
bills, we are also concerned about the lack of an overarching
statement clearly tying the two together.
For Hastings, this is particularly important when balancing our
highly productive land with growth and property
rights. They are two tensions that we navigate carefully here in
Heretaunga. Our urban areas are
surrounded by Class One and Two soils, and protecting
them is central to our economy. These soils are not
just land, they are the foundation of our
horticulture, sector, our jobs, and our
region's prosperity. Without clear integrated
purpose, these matters may be treated
inconsistently. And on the ground, that creates uncertainty
for landowners, investors, and our councils, and it
increases the likelihood of conflict, delays, and costly
legislation.
Litigation.
Uh, oh, sorry, litigation. Apologies.
Um,
with regards to the regional spatial plans, we are concerned about the
key national direction, and how it may not be available in
time to inform the first generation of regional spatial
plans. Uh, to ensure those plans achieve the intended
outcomes, we suggest, extending the statutory
time frames until the national direction is in place.
Uh, preparing these plans are co- are costly and complex
exercises, significantly more than the future development
strategies, a process we've just been through.
And in our experience, we suggest that it will require at least two years to
complete. If we are required to move too quickly
without clear direction, we risk doing the work twice,
once to meet deadlines, and again to fix it later.
And in our view, that's not good use of ratepayer funding.
Sufficient time is also needed for meaningful community, iwi, and
hapū participation. If we get this stage wrong,
we may lock in poor planning decisions for
decades. We're also concerned about
the proposed regulatory, relief regime, which
I know I've heard other submitters, making points about as well, but I
will reiterate from our perspective.
Uh, we believe that mandated or nationally directed provisions should
not trigger relief. Provisions already settled under the
RMA should be excluded,
and there is a real risk of increased, litigation,
under the current framework. In simple terms, this
could inadvertently create a system where councils are required to
compensate for rules that are legally required-- we are legally required
to implement. That is a fundamental contradiction in our
view. Instead of reducing cost and
complexity, this mechanism risks becoming a forum for disputes
over eligibility, scope, and valuation.That
means more time, more cost, and more pressure on rate
payers, not less. It also diverts funding away from
core responsibilities like infrastructure and natural hazard
resilience, which are already under significant pre- pressure,
particularly here. We recommend that the regulatory relief
framework be removed entirely from both f- bills.
However, if it is to be retained, we do believe it must be
tightened, and tightly limited to genuinely
new or bespoke provisions, and must exclude mandated or
carried over RMA rules.
We support the nationally standardized provisions for efficiency.
However, rigid, rigid standardization rules or, or
risks weakening local protections that are well, working well
already. For example, in Hastings, our plains production
zone has successfully protected our highly productive land and
managed lifestyle sub, subdivision.
That has been critical to preventing the gradual loss of our best
soils through fragmented development.
A standardized rural production zone may not
achieve the same outcome. That is a significant risk for our
community. If that protection is weakened, the
change is effectively irreversible.
We cannot grow on land we have paved over.
Once highly productive land is subdivided, we cannot restore
it. We support a pathway for bespoke
provisions at a local level. We justify...
We, we are justified, I need to emphasize that.
With decisions undertaken at a local governance level rather than by the
minister to avoid unnecessary delay and
over-centralization. We are also
concerned that the bill does not require mandatory accre-
accreditation for hearings commissioners, and I speak for, from that view
also as previously accredita- accredited commissioner.
All RMA commissioners currently must hold the Making Good Decisions
Accreditation, which ensures baseline competency in
law, natural justice, tikanga, and hearing
procedures. Without that safeguard, there is a real risk of
inconsistent decision-making, which can undermine confidence
and increase appeals. We recommend requiring mandatory
accreditation or equivalent competency standards for all
commissioners.
We recommend a retail, we recommend retail distribution
effects are included in the scope of the planning bill.
This is particularly important to our community.
This is fundamentally how we shape our towns and
cities. Managing retail distribution supports compact
settlement, housing dens- density around centers, and
strong commercial hubs. Without it, development can become
scattered, weakening our town centers, increasing
infrastructure costs, and putting more pres- pressure on our valuable
productive land. For Hastings, this directly rela-
links to protecting our fertile growing soils and maintaining our strong
local economy.
So in closing, Hastings District Council does support the intent of
the reform, but urges the panel to strengthen the bills
by explicitly embedding climate change
adaptation, providing clear integration between the two
bills, allowing realistic timeframes for
regional spatial plans, ensuring meaningful Māori
participation, avoiding mechanisms that
increase legislation and uncertainty.
These changes are not about slowing reform.
They're about making sure that the system works in practice, not
just in principle. Um, thank you for the opportunity to
present, and we're very happy to take any questions.
Look, thank you very much, Wendy, and thank you for that
submission. Um, obviously a lot of experience,
in terms of, climate adaptation and, and mitigation, having been
through Cyclone Gabrielle. So look, I might just take the, the privilege of
asking the first question, given Hastings is very familiar to
me. Um,
when, when you talk about climate adaptation and mitigation being in the goals,
w- 'cause it has been raised a few times throughout the
submissions, like, how do you genuinely think that would
help, and if there was to be, you know, obviously a cyclone
again, like, how that actually makes a difference
practically?
Well, I think from my perspective, before I hand over to Caleb, who will ask to
bring in the technical side of things, from my perspective, it makes a clear
message that we are able to take into consideration,
those impacts when we're planning for growth, when we're planning
where we live and where we work as a community.
Um, the absence of it creates a real risk in that area from my view.
Um, so I'm gonna hand over now to Caleb, if you'd like to add
anything.
Uh, thank you, Mayor Wendy. Uh, s- so I guess o- one of the issues
we have in a, I guess the, the, the
lower level of governance, in New Zealand is a real
lack of national direction about how we manage na- na-
natural hazards, how we adapt into the future.
Um, I mean, I submitted to you last year on the, the
MPS on natural hazards. It's like, I think, you
know, we're thirty-two years into the RMA, we've only just
got national direction around natural hazards and how we deal with
those. Like, this has to be top-down led.
Those really hard decisions need to come from the
top, from the elected members, around how does New
Zealand deal with these issues? It needs to be in the
statutes. It needs to flow down through the regional spatial
plans, and then when we are on the ground preparing
regional planning documents, we're backed up when we have to
say, "Stop building in dumb
places."Because as a, as a consents
manager, it is very hard to
refuse development in hazard risk
locations on a case-by-case basis.
Mm.
Because unfortunately under the RMA, which is, you know, you've
got three options: avoid, remedy, and mitigate.
For the last thirty-two years under the RMA, developers have
chosen to mitigate. So they've put in things to,
in theory, mitigate that hazard risk.
But what we know now, and especially post-cyclone, is that things
such as stopbanks, they can actually fail.
Um, and then they can actually make the hazards worse, like we saw in Pakaiwhai
where you had breaches up river
of the stopbanks. But then because the, the stopbanks down, you
know, in, in the, down by the coast in Pakaiwhai, they actually created
a, a basin essentially. And, and we had two-story buildings
go under five meters of water in a couple of
hours. So I guess what we're seeking is some really
clear direction from central government, and then needs
to be bought in across both major parties, because this is, this is a key
issue affecting New Zealand. It's not just Hawke's
Bay. Um, and we can't keep kicking the can down the road.
You know, we're facing these issues now.
Um, we need that national direction.
Tha- thank you, Caleb, for that, and I can, you know, feel the passion there as
well. So look, we'll move now to Cameron Luxton, who has
a question.
Thank you, Chair. Uh, yeah, just quickly, Hastings, appreciate in your
submission you've raised the integration between the Regional Land Transport
Plan and the, Spatial Plan.
Mm.
Could you just... It's, I don't think we've had many, many or any submitters talk
about that specifically. Could you tell us your concerns, and about
how those two plans are, interacting with each other in the new system?
Mm. I'll let you do this one, Caleb.
Yeah. Yeah, I, I guess traditionally it's really hard to coordinate those really
big infrastructure spends of land use planning and, and, and policy
planning. So it's trying to, like, connect all those things together,
right? Um, you know, for example, approving
fast track approvals in the middle of nowhere is quite a
uncoordinated way to go. It'll conflict with all your property spending
around roads of national significance, all that sort of things.
So those decisions, they need to be coordinated, and I think
that's the, the direction the government's going with creating insert,
where you've got, you know, all those relevant portfolios coming
under, one ministry, like a super ministry, 'cause it's trying to get
coordination in one spending, which is, we
know transportation spending is a substantial amount of money,
but with also with where we plan a- and
develop.
Thank you. Um, look, I'm gonna quickly jump in with, one last
question, because it's quite unique to
Hastings, and you've raised it in terms of the highly productive
lands. Um, and we haven't really traversed this whole issue during the
submission process a little bit with Horticulture New Zealand.
But during your submission, you thought...
said that the standardized zones would weaken the protection of this land.
Obviously, Hastings, mainly Class one and two land,
and you've always got that balancing act between, development and
protecting our good food producing land.
Can you just elaborate a little bit on why you think
that this doesn't, give the protection that, that is needed?
So before I pass over to Caleb, I think, thank you for the question, first of
all, Catherine. I think the, the...
From our perspective, we've, we've got planning rules right now that
work. Um, they've been tried, they've been tested, and they're getting good
outcomes for our community, and our concern is a standardized,
version won't have the same protections.
So, so I think that's the message we're really trying to send is here
specifically in Heretaunga, and there will be other parts of the country where
there are rules that are in place that have been robustly tested through
legal processes and are working well, to
achieve everyone's goals. Um, and we are concerned that the
standardization will essentially take us back to ground zero,
and may inadvertently have the perverse outcome of allowing, development
that would not have happened, under the current rules.
I'll hand over to Caleb, though, for the technical side.
Yeah. So just following on from Mayor Wendy there.
So I guess Heretaunga has been quite, I guess, leading in, in
protection of versatile soils, you know, well before the, the
NPSHPR. Probably for the last thirty years, we've recognized that
those elite soils, you can't replicate them.
Mm.
Once you build over them and develop them, you can't, you know...
But they've been created over fifteen thousand years of flooding, natural
flooding activities, essentially.
Um, so for us, we've got very bespoke subdivision
rules, which essentially say you cannot create a lifestyle site
in our planned production zone. The only way if you wanna
create a lifestyle site is that you have to amalgamate the
balance with an adjoining parcel.
So the idea is that, that we're providing an incentive.
If you wanna create a life- lifestyle site of
between five thousand square meters,
and, yeah... Sorry, u- up to five thousand square
meters, you have to amalgamate that balance with a, with a other
productive unit. And the idea is that in the past we've had a whole lot of
subdivisions down to six hectare sites, which have led to a whole lot
of sites where people say they're too small to do anything with.
So what we've, seen, and it's worked, is that,
we've seen those sites be amalgamated together, and it allows,
it, it gives more flexibility into the future-
Mm
... of technologies change, of growing methods change, if new crops come
available. Um, it's all around that sustainability of, of that
elite soil. Um, because, you know, what we're growing now, how we're
growing, that look, that might look quite different in the future.
Um, but we know, you know, once we've lost, fragmented that, those
soils, we can't get them back.
Yeah. No, absolutely. Look, thank you very much,
Caleb and Wendy for your submission.
Um, some really interesting points there, of course, that are unique to Hastings,
so, appreciate your time today.
So thank you.
Great. Thank you.
Thank you.
And we have our next submitter already with us, ready and waiting.
Uh, the Electricity Sector Environment Group.
Welcome, Martin, another familiar Hawke's Bay face, and
Christina, welcome again to the Select Committee.
Uh, and Chris, we can see you there.
Look, you've got, 15 minutes with us, so we'll hand over to you to
talk us through your submission, and then open for questions. Thank you.
Uh, morning chair, members of the committee.
Yes, we're presenting to you today on behalf of the
Electricity Sector Environmental Group, which is made up of Meridian,
Mercury NZ, Contact Energy, Genesis Energy, together with the New Zealand
Wind Energy Association. Uh, my name's Martin Williams.
I'm an RMA lawyer with about 30 years of experience, and I
helped ESEG prepare its submission on the Natural Environment and Planning Act
bills. Um, I'm joined here, as, you've just noted,
by Christina Healy, principal planner and policy advisor at Mercury, and Chris
Drayton, consents manager at, Contact
Energy. Look, ESEG's message is one of a strong...
or its overriding message is one of strong support for the
bills. They will establish a clearer,
simpler, more straightforward environmental law system,
prioritizing standardized content, meaning less but more
effective regulation and fewer moving parts, with a focus on
effects that matter, and flexible management e- techniques
to achieve overall positive, positive environmental
outcomes. The bills would harness the best elements of the RMA
following improvements over decades, including most recently under the RM2
changes last year, but discard the
rest. In ess- in essence, ESEG
seeks, that the committee stay the course
and hold firm to the basic objectives and structure of the bills.
While there's a lot of detail in ESEG's submission, this is all offered on a
making it work
better
basis.
We can't cover everything today, obviously.
Th- and we'll have to leave the written submission to speak for itself on a, on a
range of topics, including consenting and planning, processes,
for example, to ensure greater consistency across both acts because REG
projects are likely to need permits under both acts, to
remove any requirement to consider alternative sites, for water
allocation, which raises very significant priority issues, for existing
hydro. That's all dealt with in the written submission, and we'll need to, let
that, speak for itself. But given the time at stake, I'd like to hand
over now, to Christina to address the next part of this,
presentation. Thank you.
Morena. Thank you, Martin. Um,
our submission is fundamentally about energy security and affordability.
It's a, a critical issue, which is particularly top of mind at the
moment, given what we're seeing in the international, what's
happening internationally. The Boston Consulting Group in their
2025 report, Energy to Grow: Securing New Zealand's
Future, states that building renewables at pace is the number
one priority for delivering on New Zealand's secure energy
future. Doubling renewable energy is a guiding
objective for the development of these bills and Electrify NZ.
So there's no doubt that the importance of energy security,
we need energy independence, affordability, and security in
this really volatile international, context that we're
currently in.
The issue isn't just, increasing the share of renewable electricity
supply. Um, BCG also identified that we're on
track to exceed 95% share of renewables by
2027. So the issue, issue is the critical need
to supply enough renewable energy for the
electrification of the wider economy, so that's across
manufacturing, industry, agriculture, and
transportation, and to power the economic growth that we're, that
we're aiming for. The reality
is secure energy is the foundation for every
development and infrastructure goal under the planning bill, and
renewable electricity is at the heart of this.
New Zealand can achieve the necessary doubling if we put our
minds to it. Both Meridian and Genesis have already
highlighted their experiences seeking replacement consents for the Waitaki
and Tekapo hydro schemes. The time and cost of
re-litigating the starting point, the baseline,
pretending that the power stations in place for nearly 100 years
are not there, is critically important.
As renewable electricity generation generators, we are
committed. We're building at the fastest rates in history,
bigger than the Think Big, if you recall that period of our
time. As a sector, we expect to deliver a
further four terawatt hours, that's p- enough to power
580,000 households, by 2027. That's next
year. That's a lot. However, for the
bills to actually enable us to achieve this energy security and to
double renewables, our renewable electricity generation needs
express recognition from the top of the new system, preferably
in the planning bill's goals, or as a minimum, through mandatory
national policy direction under the na- under the Planning Act,
including a direction to ensure a secure and affordable
electricity supply sufficient to achieve the goals that the
act as a whole... to achieve the goals of the act as a
whole. And I'll pass back to Martin to take us through some
specifics.
Thank you, Christina. I'd just like to, turn now to the issue of environmental
limits alongside a broader issue of statutory alignmentI need to be
very clear that ESEAG supports environmental limits as a necessary and
legitimate part of any, sound environmental law system.
Done well, limits can give much greater certainty to all stakeholders under the
new system than the wide-ranging approach to bottom lines that, that
flourished under the RMA, covering all manner of things from scenic landscapes to
degraded wetlands. The basic point is, however, that there need to
be some limits
or guardrails on environmental limits themselves.
Whatever you may have heard from other submitters, as currently drafted,
environmental limits would be at the very apex of the new system
with quite profound implications across the
system. For example, regionally set ecosystem health limits
could constrain the content of national standards under Section
85, of the Natural Environment Bill.
Spatial plans have to be consistent with environmental limits, which
will in turn drive land use plan content under the Planning Act, and no
natural resource permit can be granted which would breach a limit.
This effectively inverts the intended planning hierarchy, where
regional limits beat national direction, and also means that in the event of a
contest, the Natural Environment Act wins over the Planning
Act. ESEAG submits, therefore, that environmental limits should
only be imposed, or firstly submits they should only be imposed where actually
needed to address the truly most important matters, and namely where
there is a risk of significant and irreversible harm.
That is, a much higher threshold of justification should be required for
environmental limits than for more widespread regulation across the system
generally, given the impacts, limits would have, on that system.
They should also be proportional to the risk involved, not a
sledgehammer to crack any given environmental nut.
A bigger picture, environmental limits are a classic study of a broader
challenge w- here with the dual act structure.
A key, point of ESEAG's submission relates to the need for greater alignment of
goals with the two acts talking to each other, to avoid the
type of conflict we've had under the RMA, where competing national direction
keeps being, put up to the Supreme Court to resolve.
To avoid a repeat of that core RMA failing, one suggestion made by
ESEAG is for combined national policy direction covering both
acts or expressly enabling direction under the Planning Act to prevail
over direction under the Natural Environment Act in the event of conflict.
So this is clear from the outset in the legislation itself rather than
scrapping it out in the courts. But look, a classic study of the two acts not
talking to each other is for environmental limits, where there's actually no
requirement on the minister to have any regard to the goals of the Planning Act at
all when setting such limits. While the minister must
consider, whether national direction in respect of a goal would
unreasonably restrict the achievement of goals within that one
act, it doesn't apply across the two of them.
So what ESEAG has submitted that is an environmental limits should not be
imposed under the Natural Environment Act, where this would un-unreasonably
restrict the goals of the Planning Act, and that's a really important
point. It's not to say that environmental limits can never
prevail. It is simply that where this
happens, this is justified with active consideration of what that would mean
for, for example, housing, infrastructure, and the built environment
generally, and of course, existing infrastructure, the particular concern that
Christina just raised, as has been shared with you by Genesis
a-and Meridian and Mercury. Thank you. I'll hand back to, uh...
I'll hand to Chris Stratton now, who's gonna talk to you about effects
management.
Oh, you're just on mute there, Chris.
You might want to turn your microphone on.
Um, still can't hear you there, Chris.
I'm just, conscious of your time, Martin, so I'm-- and
we've got a couple of questions.
Yeah. Okay.
So I'm wondering whether you just want to perhaps wrap up, and then we'll go to the
questions.
Okay. Well, I just wanted to really speak to some of Chris's content, and we'll go
to the questions. There's some classic studies there of the problem
with no net loss and an effects management hierarchy, essentially
producing what Chris would describe as baffling outcomes,
contests between experts doing accounting exercises, and you've heard about
this, I think, from Meridian. Um,
and, really what, you know, g- Contact can
bring to you as an example of, for example, a small patch of dry cow
paddock, which had introduced wetland facultative
weeds, and, and despite offering a much larger, more meaningful help for
wetlands with important, species and biodiversity values, the council's
hands were tied because of the effects management hierarchy, and,
and the no net loss requirement. And, and Contact couldn't get its Southland
farm consented on exactly the same basis because it was found that the
loss of 2.5 hectares out of 140 hectares of trampled,
pugged, and browsed wetlands was too much.
So all of that is really grist to the mill that you've heard about from
Meridian, that, in effect, the no net loss
goal for, biodiversity must go, but conversely, the
flexible a-approach to effects management in,
Sections, 14 and 15 of the act should be retained.
And I was gonna talk about transitional timeframes.
There just isn't enough time, and I'll finish with this.
Um, the- there really needs to be an investment up front in
the system to get the national direction right.
It's going to write the script for all subsequent plan content.
It's gonna have profound implica- implications for years.
Spend a bit of time on that now. Twenty working days for submission
simply isn't enough when you could have national policy direction under both acts
released at once. That's much bigger than what happened last year with all those
changes, to the national policy statements, where there were 40
days. And, and, you know, the, the plan process is just too
fast. Slow it down a bit. Take an extra year if you need to get all of that
done, and it'll pay huge dividends downstream in terms of the n- fewer
consents being needed and better plans.O- over to questions now.
Thank you very much.
Look, thank you, Martin. Thanks, Christina and Chris.
Uh, look, great submission. Uh, really appreciate your time on it.
Uh, lots in there to, take on board.
Look, we have got time most probably for one question.
We'll go to Scott Willis, and then we'll see if we've got time for
Cameron.
Oh, you're on mute. Uh, Scott, do you wanna just pop your, your, your microphone
on?
Okay. Um, thank you. Thank you, Martin.
Thank you, Christina. Excellent submission.
Um, now, you've talked about the, the national policy statement for
renewables that has, has to be read alongside all those others
and, and you've also talked about the conflict resolution.
I know you've gone o- over this, but I wonder if you could just
reiterate, you know, the, the, the drafting options or the, the
ways in which we can, we can improve this to avoid that
conflict with, with other statutes because we're very aware that
the NPS was written in s- you know, back in
2010, 2011, has not had any noticeable
impact on enabling the renewable pathway.
So if you, if you would go into that, that would be helpful. Thank you.
Look, very squarely and briefly, it's just not directive enough.
The NPSREG doesn't have the courage and the bold and the directive
words to match the likes of the New Zealand Coastal Policy Statement.
So it needs to have strongly directive language, it needs to be deliberate,
deliberate, and unashamedly backing REG so that it
can compete with direction that seeks to protect, say,
a, an, an outstanding natural landscape.
And also be honest that REG necessarily has unavoidable
effects, so don't require them to be avoided or you are avoiding REG
altogether, but require that its effects be managed in a
flexible way to achieve an overall better environmental
outcome. REG is fundamentally an environmental benefit
proposition, not just an economic one.
Understand all of that within one coherent piece of national
direction, and you'll be good to go.
Look, thank you very much all for your submission.
We have met time today, so, we appreciate your time.
Really thorough submission and, and, and lots to consider there.
So thank you.
Thank you for your close attention to it all, and all very best.
Thanks, Martin. Um-
Yep
... so members, now, just before, we move on to our next submitter, I'm
going to welcome David MacLeod to the chair.
He is going to, chair the meeting, through to
11:30. Um, and we will also, welcome
Cameron Brewer to our meeting, and I'll hand it over to you, David.
Thanks, Catherine. And, as everybody sees, next up on the agenda is the
Waikato District Council.
Thank you. Um, can I just do a quick point of order there, Mr.
MacLeod, new chair? Just to, clarify, who's
actually on this committee on behalf of the Greens, because
I understand that, Steve Abel was on select committee B.
Um, and then we have Scott Willis and Julie Anne Genter on
this one.
So I can-
Just wondering whether there, there needs to be a, a whip slip
for, somebody or-
Yeah, no
... seeking leave of the committee to participate.
I'm, I'm on, I was on for that, for that submitter, and
I'm coming back on, I don't know where, which subcommittee.
Um, I've got three to do today.
Okay. So still speaking to this point of order, is there, um...
I'm just procedurally speaking, if ACT was to bring up, input,
a couple of extra MPs on, would we need to be supplying a whip slip for the
committee to see? Would we need to be seeking leave?
How would we manage that?
Catherine, you go ahead. I can see you wanting to jump in.
Yeah. So look, we're- I'll just jump in here because, and, and, we may just get
the clerk to affirm this, but, my understanding is that you
are able to have one participating in the submission
process, and so one active. Uh, but obviously, of course,
other members of any party are welcome to,
join select committees, at any point, but
obviously not as a participating MP.
Um, perhaps, Julian, you would like to just clarify
that, for us.
Um, over the last few days, we've had different
MPs, jumping in and out to cover
submissions. Um, and prior to this, we
were getting all the whip slips. I don't-- My understanding was
that it was maybe for this subcommittee situation.
Um, I don't know if they have probably done the whip slips for every single one,
but, like, for example, Scott just wanted to do this one submitter,
and then I didn't participate in the meeting, but I stayed
online with my camera off just so that I wouldn't, I would know
when he left. Yeah.
No, and we, and we appreciate that-
Scott finished, so that's why-
... and we are able to do that, Cameron, because
obviously, respectfully, a, a lot of the parties have different
spokespeople, in different portfolio areas and
obviously want to hear different parts of select committees or different
submissions. Um, I'll just get the clerk to, to reaffirm
that just in terms of, party participation
and standing orders.
Um, yeah, I can provide advice in private, if you'd
like.
Yes.
'Cause we're still in a public session right now.
Yes, that's right. We are in public session, but we're just affirming that we've
got one participant-
Yeah. So we have received, whip slips from the Green Party.
Uh, there's a lot of coming and going in and out of the Zoom, obviously.
Okay.
So there will be some time where there is overlap with two members in attendance,
but we always make sure that only one of those members,
is able to speak and ask questions.
Okay. No, that's all, that's all we need to know.
So as long as we just have one participating, that is, that is
fine.
Yes.
Okay, Cameron, does that clarify it for you before you start?
Uh, yeah, I, I think so. Um, I was just, yeah, putting a lot of work into making
sure that, the ACT members, were in the r- correct place with the
correct whip slips. Just making sure everyone's-
Okay
... doing the same thing.
I appreciate it.
And, and, and ACT is more than welcome to send members over for various
submissions if they would like, and obviously having one participating.
But, appreciate, your feedback there, Cameron.
Look, I'll now hand over to David, to, get us
back going on the, on the select committee submissions this morning.
Thanks, Catherine, and we better move straight into it 'cause we've got a tight
schedule today. So we, uh-
We do
... do have the Waikato District Council. I saw there, Cameron, just so...
There we are. Welcome to you all. Uh, we've got 15 minutes
allocated for your time with us today, and I'll, let you, open up how
you, you choose to, and leave some time for questions at the end. Thank you.
Thank you. We'll jump right in then. Tena koutou katoa.
My name is Crystal Beavis. I'm a councillor at Waikato District Council.
I chair our policy and regulatory committee, and I'm here to speak for the
council. Joining me today are Will Gauntlett, our General
Manager for Strategy and Growth, and James Fuller, our Principal
Planner. Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today on the Planning Bill
and the Natural Environment Bill.
Waikato District Council supports the general intent of these bills, and we want to
work proactively with the government to ensure delivery of a consistent
and streamlined planning framework.
With this in mind, I'd like to reference a letter the Waikato Mayoral Forum
penned in late January to the Minister of Local Government, Honorable Simon Watts,
and the Minister for the Environment, Honorable Chris Bishop, saying the
current local government reform program is a once in a
generation opportunity to address systemic
issues. But it requires whole of government
alignment, clarity of functions at all levels,
and well-sequenced changes that will make implementation
achievable.
By way of context, the Waikato District sits between Auckland and Hamilton in
the Golden Triangle, and we're experiencing strong and sustained
growth. Our district has a population similar to Palmerston
North, about ninety thousand, but with almost twice the growth rate of
that city over the last six years. And that's spread across
multiple small townships in a geographic area nearly the
size of Auckland City, about four and a half thousand square kilometers.
This presents unique challenges in planning for growth and
infrastructure delivery. Look, we are ready to lead with
integrated regional spatial plans, natural environment plans,
and land use plans. But the success of these bills will
depend on getting that transition right from the
outset. So we come to this reform with
really very recent lived experience.
Our district plan review is very close to being made operative after
almost ten years of work and represents a significant
investment by our community.
Through that process, we undertook extensive district-wide ground
truthing, including a detailed assessment of significant natural
areas, and sought to anticipate emerging national direction,
including, for example, the national policy statement on urban development as
best we could. That means we now have three-by-three development
opportunities in towns of five to ten thousand people with relatively
modest infrastructure. Whereas our large neighbor, Auckland, is now
constraining those opportunities because of infrastructure
concerns. How ironic . Anyway, our
experience has reinforced how complex, time-consuming,
and costly plan making can be. So it's important that
the proposed reforms do not inadvertently
require councils and communities to relitigate matters that
have only just been robustly resolved,
especially if we're going to keep our rates down, as this district
is actually doing. Our first priority in
coming to you is to address growth pressures and
frankly unrealistic transitional time frames.
How do we sort it? Resource management reform needs to move in
lockstep with local government reform overall so that functions, roles,
and time frames align with accountable milestones that build
on what's gone before. So we're asking for early
release of national direction to create a framework we can work
within, early clarity on government settings, and a realistic
phased transition that recognizes all the concurrent local government
reforms and allows meaningful engagement with iwi,
hapū, our wider communities, and the development
sector. Our second priority is
greater recognition of joint management agreements and Te Tiriti o
Waitangi principles. In our district, we already
operate within nationally significant go- co-governance and partnership
frameworks that shape how we manage growth, land use, and
environmental outcomes. So these bills are an
opportunity to build on what's working now.
But as drafted, they risk stepping away from established arrangements and
limiting mana whenua involvement.
We're seeking that Te Tiriti principles and settlement legislation be
explicitly recognized, that local Māori participation
be embedded throughout the framework, and that iwi and hapū environmental
plans be required inputs into planning and consent, and
consenting as they are now. If iwi
involvement is largely restricted to treaty settlement arrangements, this
not only ignores, ignores kaitiakitanga over ancestral
land, but actually is highly inequitable
for groups and iwi who have yet to settle.
They have no standing then. Our third priority concern
is the regulatory relief settings and the financial risk to
rural councils like ourselves. We
support reforms that make planning simpler and more community
focused. But broad compensation settings could
shift large and unpredictable costs onto our rural
ratepayers.In our operative district plan,
we already protect thousands of titles containing
SNAs, significant natural areas, SASMs, sites and areas of
significant Māori, and heritage items confirmed through
robust processes.
Reopening these matters could divert funds away
from core services and delay essential growth
infrastructure.
We're asking for national standardization, an early release of
standardized zones, and a central compensation fund
to cover obligations driven by national policy
such as SNAs.
We followed the rules, so please don't make us pay for it
all over again. Overall, we're
very positive about these reforms, but we're the ones who need to make
these changes work on the ground in a high growth,
treaty settled rural district. We want to avoid
unnecessary risk, cost, or loss of confidence in the
system. We are ready to partner with central government, and so
we're asking the government to partner with us to achieve durable
reform in a way that we know is achievable.
Ngā mihi nui. Thank you.
I'll pass to Will.
Uh, thank you, Councillor Beavis. Good morning, chair and committee members.
Um, ko ku toku ingoa. Ko te, general manager of
strategy and growth me tōku hiara.
Um, I'll build briefly on Councillor Beavis's comments, focusing more, on
an operational, lens and what this means in practice.
Uh, so emphasizing the points that we see these reforms as a real
opportunity to develop a more integrated, practical, and
outcomes-focused planning system.
Uh, and the, the staff team here are really excited about what that opportunity
presents for us. Uh, two points, that I've got to
make. Uh, one is around foundations and transitions, and the
second point is around national standards and system
enablers.
So thr- four points regarding foundations and
transitions. One is, emphasizing, and I imagine you've heard
of, from lots of submitters about this, front loading the national
direction. So we need the government to drive early release of national policy
direction, standards, methodologies, and limits to allow us to start once
and to start well. Um, we have, experience in
reworking plans through process, as national direction emerges and changes
over time, and we think there's an opportunity here for that to be set clearly
up front, so that the whole country can
align. Second point, within this,
foundations and transitions is, is to lock in clear roles and governance
early. Uh, so we need certainty about who decides what and at what
scale, and how conflicts are resolved.
Third point, adopt a phased and prin- practical transition.
So we want to see a staged transition that builds on recent plan making
processes, avoids, reopening, settled matters,
and as, as Councillor Beavis mentioned, we're on the verge of making our district
plan operative. We've got, three remaining appeals that are almost resolved.
So, we are coming into this reform,
time, with a very fresh and new, district plan, and we wanna
make sure that, the wins through that process are, are
enduring. Fourth subpoint there is to make regional spatial
planning a local delivery system.
So we see immense value in statutory regional poli-- spatial
plans. Uh, and we've got experience with the future proof model, and
seeing real benefit in, some of the things that that's been able to achieve.
Um, but we do wanna see that, process driving stronger,
consistency to ensure that those plans do not
simply staple together existing growth strategies, but,
deliver a system that addresses infrastructure capacity, sequencing,
climate and hazard constraints, long-term investment priorities so that we can,
plan across a region without boundaries.
Second main point is around national standards and system
enablers. Just conscious of time, I might, skip through this rather
briefly, just to say that there's an, a real opportunity.
National direction is one thing, but national provision of, standards and
systems, tools, platforms, is something that
this opportunity, this once in a generation opportunity allows the government to
roll out, standardized systems and tools so that we're not trying to
procure and deliver and customize tools, at a district or regional
level. So in closing, I want to emphasize that our council,
alongside its partners, is ready to work constructively with the government,
on nationally aligned and enduring system reform, and the focus of our submission
was a workable system for-- that considers high growth, largely rural
districts like ours, capable of, of being implemented efficiently and cost
effectively, and designed to f- support confidence, collaboration, and
long-term outcomes that are enduring.
Thank you very much for your time, and we welcome your questions.
Thank you very much. Uh, questions from members.
Now, I'd suggest don't take the silence as the fact that we don't value your
submission. I think the fact is, is that we've had many days of, submissions,
and many from local government, and you're very much in sync with what we've
heard from, many other, local government entities
itself. If there's no questions from members, I
think, we, we may move on. But we do appreciate you coming forward this,
this morning and reiterating the many points that you've made to us.
So thank you very much, for that. Just make sure there's no questions.
No, it doesn't look to be. So thank you very much, Waikato District
Council.
We're glad we've been so convincing. Thank you.
Thank you.
Kia ora.
Right. Members, on our schedule now, we're actually due
for a, a bit of a break. Could I perhaps ask that we, we reconvene
at ten AM? That brings us back on track with timing, and I think it does give us a,
a little bit of time for a break, but gets us back on schedule.
So ten AM we'll start back again. Thank you.
Julian,
if you can hear me, my camera's been locked off by the
host.
Um, can you turn it on now?
Thank you.
Didn't know that we could do that, but okay.
Very good. Hey, thanks to everybody.
Uh, let's move straight on to our, our next, submitter, which is,
Tuwharetoa Māori Trust Board.
So I can see Maia and Peter's, on there.
Can we turn cameras on, please?
Mōrena. We're just trying to get those
going.
Mōrena tātou.
Kia ora.
We're still waiting for a couple of our members, and I see Maia's there too.
Uh, not too sure what's going on with her technology.
E ngā kuia, I understand that Sarah Asher and the Kai Pōhutaharo just need to
be,
added.
Uh, there we go. Excellent. Tēnā koutou.
Ngā mihi haramai ki tēnei huihuinga.
Uh, welcome to you, you all. Uh, we've got 15 minutes available for your
submission, so you use the first part of that as you see fit, and, we'll
have some questions at the end. Thank you. Kia ora.
E te Tiamana, e nga mema o te Komiti Taiao, tēnā koutou
katoa. Ko Tongariro te maunga. Ko Taupo-nui-a-Tia
te moana. Ko Tūwharetoa te iwi. Ko Te Heuheu te
tangata. Ko Sarah Asher tō puna ingoa.
He uri au nō Tūwharetoa. I'm here
representing the Tūwharetoa Māori Trust Board alongside our chief
executive and our technical team.
Excuse me.
Ngāti Tūwharetoa have maintained an enduring relationship with our lands
in the central North Island since the arrival of our tūpuna,
Ngatoroirangi. Our whakapapa binds us to this place and
underpins our role as kaitiaki.
Our role, or our position is not the same as
others. We are not solely a settlement
entity. Outside of settlement, we hold legal title to
Taupō waters, not just the lake bed, but the water
column and the air space as well. Put simply,
we own the lake. That is a unique position in
Aotearoa, and we hold that title not for
ourselves, but in trust for our people as
kaitiaki. At the same time, we are a
settlement representative for Ngāti Tūwharetoa as part of the Upper
Waikato River settlement, working alongside
Waikato, Raukawa, Te Arawa River iwi,
Maniapoto, and the Crown in co-governance and co-management
arrangements. At the center of that is Te Ture
Whaimana, a statutory instrument that sets the
direction for the health and wellbeing of the river.
So when we talk about reform, we're not starting from
nothing. We are starting from a system that already
recognizes our authority,
and these bills move in the opposite direction,
undermining that authority. That matters
because our authority is not symbolic.
It has legal, practical and intergenerational
effect. The waters of Taupō and
the Upper Waikato are not isolated.
They flow from our maunga into our lake, into the
Waikato River and through multiple iwi and communities.
What happens here does not stay
here. Decisions made here
flow downstream, and so do the consequences.
These waters are central to our identity, but they are also
critical to the environmental, social and economic
wellbeing of communities far beyond our rohe.
They support ecosystems, they sustain tourism and energy
generation, and they are a source of drinking water.
As kaitiaki at the headwaters of the system, we carry a
responsibility not just to our own
people, but to those downstream as
well. With that in mind, the
Trust Board strongly opposes these bills, and my
kōrero will focus on four key points.
First, these bills weaken environmental
protection. Second, they recognize
some property rights, but not Māori property
rights. Third, they undermine
Treaty settlements despite the government's stated commitment to
uphold them. And fourth, they remove
already limited mechanisms for iwi participation in
decision-making. These
bills are not the reform that has been
promised. They are a step backwards and not
in a minor way. This is a fundamental shift in
direction. The purpose provisions in
these bills are weaker than what currently exists in the
RMA.
They shift the focus from protecting the environment toward
enabling its use. The new
framework replaces clear priorities with a system
of trade-offs, where environmental and cultural
values can be traded away.
Within that, Māori interests are reduced to one
factor among many, even where iwi hold
legal rights and responsibilities.
That is not neutrality.
It is the removal of existing obligations that
already exist in law.
Key Māori provisions that currently exist under the
RMA are either removed or
diluted, and the repeated use of softer
language like "seek to achieve" weakens
accountability. Put simply,
these bills lower the standard of environmental
protection in
Aotearoa.The
bills place strong emphasis on protecting property
rights, but that protection is applied
selectively. In our case, the Crown is
fully aware of our ownership and legal interest in Taupō
waters.
Those rights are not new. They are well established, and they
are significant. And yet they are not properly
recognized or provided for in these
bills. Just as concerning, the
Crown did not engage with the Trust Board in the development of these
provisions. So we are left in a position where
property rights are being strengthened in principle
but ignored in practice where Māori ownership is
concerned. That is a minor gap-- that is
not a minor gap. This is a fundamental
inconsistency and one the Crown needs to explain.
You cannot claim to strengthen property rights while ignoring
those that are already
recognized. The bill
states that Treaty settlements will be
upheld, but in these bills that is
largely reduced to requiring settlements to be recognized or
taken into account.
That is not how our settlements are designed to operate.
Our settlements, including those in the Upper Waikato, are
made up of more than a single piece of
legislation. They include deeds,
accords, protocols, and ongoing relationships
with the Crown. Together, those
arrangements are intended to work as a whole, with real
effect in how decisions are made.
The concept of equivalency is critical
here. It requires careful consideration of
how those arrangements are carried forward into the new
system, so that their integrity, intent,
and effect are maintained. These
bills do not do that.
They change how settlements operate without our
agreement.
Instead, they risk reducing settlements to matters that can be
acknowledged but not fully given effect
to. That creates a real risk that
settlements are weakened. At a
minimum, the legislation must allow for
settlement-specific changes to ensure equivalency
is achieved, and it should not proceed
until that work has been done in agreement with settlement
entities. Without that, this
reform cuts across arrangements that have already been
agreed.
Joint management agreements, transfers of power and mana
whakahono ā-rohe are practical examples
of how our resource management relationships operate in the real
world. They are mechanisms that
enable iwi, local authority-- and local authorities to make
decisions together. They give effect to shared
responsibility and shared decision-making.
We have also seen in practice that where provisions are not
mandatory, progress can
stall. That happens when parties are not
aligned, and there is no requirement to
act. These bills move in the wrong
direction. They remove and weaken these types of
arrangements and rely more heavily on
standard processes that do not reflect existing
arrangements. That reduces the requirement for
parties to act, and in our experience, when that
requirement is not there, decisions do not get
made, and that takes us
backwards. We carry responsibilities
as kaitiaki, and we do not do that
lightly. These bills place those
responsibilities at risk. They move away from the
direction already agreed through our settlements, and they weaken the
systems that give effect to them. That is not
acceptable. We cannot support these bills in their current
form. They must be amended to properly
reflect our rights, our interests and authority already
recognized in law.
Tena koutou katoa. If you have any questions, I'm
happy to take those now.
Kia ora, Sarah, and we'll go straight into questions. Huhana.
Tena koutou, Tūwharetoa iwi, otirā, e te Matua
Rākai. A koutou me o āpiha, e mihi nui ana ki a koutou
me te mana nui kua p**a mai ki mua i a tātou.
Um, wonderful to hear from Tūwharetoa and, those
affirmations of continued rangatiratanga from our iwi.
And, really wanting to understand, so we've had in the
Māori Affairs Select Committee, Auditor-General has produced
a report around how, government
departments, have not,
upheld existing Treaty settlements.
And w-we're hearing the themes coming through from different iwi groups
or those who even have mana whakahono, and other
statutory acknowledgements, their ongoing concern around the fact
that they feel like they have to relitigate again, and it's
a renegotiation of rights and interests.
Um, from a Tūwharetoa perspective, knowing, you know, the
size that you have, the whenua Māori, the ratepayer, you know,
size that you have within your rohe and district, but those
kaitiakitanga, responsibilities,
do you believe that, this is a
modern breach of your, Te Tiriti
rights?And that as an honourable
kāwanatanga, the time is to pause and come back to the tepu
with, iwi such as Tūwharetoa to really discuss this before
proceeding forward.
Tēnā koe, Huhana. Uh, otirā Ngāti Hine. Nui tonu.
Uh,
I guess in short, yes and yes.
Um, we are s- really clear in our submission and our na- and our
kōrero today that that is exactly what's happening.
Um, and that we need to be having these discussions
before any bills are created. Um, for a
more fulsome response though, I am going to refer to our
team, to just make sure that they can cover things off.
So, Maia?
Āe. Tēnā koe, Huhana. Tēnā koe, tērā kōrero.
The point you've made r- really, gets to the heart of why Section
10, which is the proposed equivalency interim section, will be
problematic. Because what you've identified is the Auditor-General
recognizing that, the government departments don't know how to do it,
and the promise that has been identified under Section 10 is, "Just trust
us until you've actually reached a settlement agreement a- about how we
properly provide for the integrity, intent, and effect of your settlement.
We'll continue to provide for whatever we think equivalency is." And the
Auditor-General has said, "Well, actually, these government departments don't
know." So there is a real and material risk that that happens in the
interim, and in doing so, that these failings are
embedded in a system, and then the settlements seek to interface
with that system, and those matters are already problematic.
And the ability to unpick that and to properly provide for what's
necessary is significantly diminished.
Kia ora, Maia. A- and thank you for that, response to, Huhana's question,
and thank you very much to you all for the, the succinct,
and, and, and very clear submission that you provided us today.
Unfortunately, our time has come to an end, so kia ora mai.
Kia ora.
Thank you.
Right. We'll move now-
Kia ora, Huhana
... to, Christchurch Airport,
please.
Good morning, Michael. I can see you there, just need your camera turned on.
Oh, perfect. Hopefully that's, um... Apologies for that.
Um...
We can hear you.
Great.
Just no, no video.
Uh, is that going?
That's it. Well done.
That's it. Voices to you.
Thank you very much. Welcome this morning.
We've got 15 minutes for, for you both, gentlemen.
Um, so use that time at the beginning to...
as you see fit, and we'll have some questions at the end. So welcome.
Great. Excellent. Thank you. Um, kia ora koutou.
Um, so my name's Michael Singleton.
I'm the Chief Strategy and Stakeholder Officer here at Christchurch International
Airport. Uh, on my right, I'm joined today by Jesse
Amer. Uh, Jesse's our Senior Environment and Planning Advisor,
and he deals with many of the issues we'll talk about today first hand.
So if we get to the point where we have some more technical questions, Jesse's,
Jesse's the person who may be able to assist more with those.
Um, just briefly, just, just to repeat, Christchurch
Airport's South Island's primary international gateway, and it's New Zealand's
second-largest airport. Um, we support passenger travel,
freight movement, tourism, emergency response, and others be,
across the South Island and beyond.
Um, we appreciate the opportunity to appear alongside the submission we've
made earlier, and also alongside the submission
made by New Zealand Airports Association, which they spoke
to earlier in the piece. And I guess just at the outset to note that we
strongly, support that. Uh, our comments today are
designed to reinforce what we believe is a common sector position.
Um, but also what we'd like to do today is just bring, or offer our
perspective, both as a nationally significant infrastructure
operator, but also as a long-term economic, platform within the
region. And I think that's probably one of the central points we'd like to
leave the committee with, today, and that is that airports are more than
just transport nodes. They're more than just the place you catch your
flight to, to and from Wellington.
Um, they are economic platforms. Um, they drive social and economic
wellbeing in the regions that they support.
For us at Christchurch Airport, that economic platform supports
high-tech manufacturing industry here in Christchurch, high-value
exporters up and down the South Island, and supplies, inputs for
thousands of businesses and many thousands of jobs across the South
Island. Um, and one of the, reasons why we're keen to speak
today is just to ensure that the planning system, that we're designing
enables that activity while ensuring the infrastructure that makes it
possible, to continue to operate safely and
effectively. Um, so getting the national direction, spatial
planning, and protections right at the front end of the system is
critical.
Um, as I said, we've got a dual role.
Um, first and foremost, we're a national- nationally significant
infrastructure provider. Um, but also, amongst
that, and it is a really important part of, of who we are and how we build our
own resilience, we're a long t- long-term landowner, and we're a
developer within the airport precinct.
Um, we support a growing cluster of aviation, engineering, logistics, and export
businesses on our campus, by, depending on which count you
use, that's probably between 7,000 and 9,000 people, who
are in employment on our campus alone.
Um, and they're not just an industrial development.
Um, we provide high-value aviation engineering capability, and
logistics and supply chain businesses which we know, have an
ever important, role, in a, in a challenging
world from times. Um, but thatThey operate and choose to
operate and locate at our airport precisely because of the
infrastructure and aviation environment we provide.
Um, at its simplest, Pratt & Whitney is a really good example of
that. Um, they're an amazing success story for our country.
Um, they're a major aircraft engine and main-maintenance facility,
incredibly talented people, employed, highly
skilled engineers and support international aviation supply chains.
Those businesses, depend directly on the continued safe
and efficient operation of the airport itself.
So from our perspective, when we think about the Act, it's important that it
enables new infrastructure and the development that it facilitates, but
it also protects existing infrastructure that is currently
facilitating widespread economic and social
wellbeing. And we've been here for ninety years,
so we'd like to keep that going, for another ninety years, and this act is
a, is a really crucial part of that.
In terms of just our overall position on the bills, look, we support the
direction, of that reform, and we recognize that the current
system is in need of, of change. Um,
we support a plan-led system with stronger national directions
and recognize that it's got real potential to improve certainty for both
infrastructure investment and those development outcomes, which are
crucial. But we also recognize that for it to
succeed, we need to resolve those conflicts early, and
those conflicts, and particularly those between infrastructure and surrounding
land use. And we know from the conflicts we see in the
current system that language and clarity really
matter in the construction of that system.
So clarity, directions, and priority are the things that will set
us up well for the future.
For us, those planning horizons extend across decades, and the
infrastructure we manage must operate continuously and safely
over long periods of time, and how we approach that is, in the first
instance, we seek to avoid incompatible land use
nearby and promote complementary land use and
strong planning, and it's only after that that we look to mitigate the
impacts of that. For us, that's always the second-best solution.
And once those incompatible land uses are established around us, those
conflicts become very, very difficult to unwind,
and the impacts can be quite material.
So I guess in terms of our key asks, we're targeted on three refinements.
The first is ensuring infrastructure is clearly enabled and
protected in the goals framework.
Secondly, that infrastructure providers are involved early in
the system, both being around the table when those regional spatial
plans are developed and through consultation when national
directions are prepared and being promoted.
And thirdly, and importantly, the framework needs to operate
coherently for infrastructure through clear defer--
definitions and effective designation
procedures. I guess just turn to that first one and how
infrastructure is treated within the goals framework.
Um,
we are highly supportive of including a specific infrastructure
goal, and that's highlighted within the NZAA
submission, but which also highlights there's a risk that differences in
drafting between environmental goals and infrastructure goals
can unintentionally create an informal hierarchy in
practice. Our experience under the current system shows that
relatively small differences in wording or gaps can lead to
significant differences in interpretation, and those are
real-world implications. And for us, that matters
greatly. We can't relocate, we need to operate
continuously, and we have to plan for decades ahead.
And getting those things right are critical for that.
So for that, we'd support clarif-clarifying that infrastructure
should be enabled and protected, particularly significant
infrastructure, and where there's an operational and functional
need for it to locate in specific
places.
The second point I just wanna talk about is, is regional spatial planning, and we
do see that as a very important mechanism, within the system.
And we strongly support it, and recognize that if it's implemented
well, we think we can resolve some of those land use conflicts
early. It'll send clear signals to those looking to develop, where
they can develop, and before incompatible development becomes
established. Um, that's important.
We often hear about reverse, sensitivity.
It's often talked about in noise, but in practice, it's much broader
than that. It relates, to the protection of our entire operational
environment that's necessary for safe operation,
of our aviation part of our, business.
And, and those are things like not just noise.
So that's our obstacle limitation surfaces.
That's how you can land our planes safely.
It's our protected air spaces around us.
It's our radar systems, our landing systems, our navigation
systems. Uh, it's helicopter and emergency
operations, how they can leave and access airports, but also
wildlife hazard management. So those things are, are
critical, for us, and they can't be traded off for
other objectives without constraining the airport and the development that it
supports. So where that, incompatible
development does occur, they don't-- the impacts don't stop at the airport
boundary. They'll flow into businesses that depend on our operational
environment, including those in aerospace engineering,
aviation services, and the export sector.
We've talked before about Pratt & Whitney.
Um, they rely entirely, on that, just as an
example. And by them continuing to, to test jet
engines at night that they're servicing and repairing, or the ability of freight
opera-operators to operate at night, to work within their supply
chains.So it's not just about managing amenity
effects, it's about protecting the operational integrity of infrastructure
that underpins significant economic and social wellbeing in
those regions, and maintaining our performance to facilitate that
activity over long periods of time.
Um, just, I'm probably speeding up a little bit, I'm conscious of the time for for
you. Um, look, the other piece is similar on national,
instruments. Again, getting the right people at t- table
early on, is critical for resolving those
early. Um, what we would say is infrastructure operators hold really
deep practical knowledge of, those infrastructure planning
horizons, the potential for operational constraints, often you only
know those if you know the business, and the safety requirements.
So, again, we think it's critical that those key infrastructure providers,
or representatives of them, have a seat at the table when national direction and
standards and spatial plans are, are developed.
So, again, for us, regional spatial planning, making
sure engagement with infrastructure providers is a mandatory step as
we develop those plans as well. I just wanna quickly
touch on just a real-life, example, then I can, hand it over
to you. And, you know, I'll just briefly refer, we are, we are currently
awaiting, a fast-track approvals, for a
process, for a development that's essentially on our
border. Um, we've been, invited to
comment, as an infrastructure operator, but only
once that proposal had been developed to an advanced
stage. And our concern was very clear, aviation
safety and the protection of the airport's operational
environment were paramount considerations.
This development gives, issues around those things I talked about,
obstacle limitation services, the ability of rescue helicopters who
make something like 1,000 trips from the air for rescue activity every year,
bird strike risk, and the key aviation navigation systems
which, at Christchurch, are the core backbone of the South Island
aviation network. Um, our concern there is,
that once, once a decision is taken, it's very much like
toothpaste, you can't get it back into the tube.
And, and for that, the language really matters.
Um, we're in a battle about those gaps we talked about,
where the national standards for infrastructure apply
or don't apply to certain types of consents, and we are really keen to make sure
that that, there's greater clarity around that so we can
avoid, incompatible nearby development that will have real t-
long-term
impacts. So if I could, conclude before I
hand back, if I've left any time for questions.
Um,
we support the intent and direction of the reforms.
Um, we are keen to see that, that the reforms
enable development while protecting the infrastructure that it depe- that that
development actually depends on.
Um, and we think there is the ability to achieve that balance.
It'll depend on enabling and protecting infrastructure, resolving land
use consents early through spatial planning and clearly thought-out national
directions, and ensuring that infrastructure expertise is involved in
the development of national direction and standards.
So look, thank you very much for taking the time to, to
listen to that, and very happy to answer whatever questions we can in the time
you have allowed.
Thank you, uh... Thank you, Michael and Jesse. Hey, Cam, I did see your hand up.
Did you have a question there?
Oh, thank you, Chair. I, I did, but, I saw time had come up, so I thought I'd
be polite and drop my hand.
Is it, is it a quick one? We will work-
Uh, yeah, it's okay. It's quick. Um, my question is, in the
bill, you know, you've talked about, Michael, we've got, protected
infrastructure in the spatial planning phase, and you did briefly
mention it. What do you, uh... And that is reverse sensitivity if that doesn't
happen. What do you see in the bill that enables reverse
sensitivity, to be accounted for, later on
down the track if that spatial planning isn't...
We all want it to be perfect up front, but if it isn't, how do you see the
protection working?
We, we think that gets harder. Um, it is, I guess, the Swiss cheese thing, isn't
it? That's a layer that, you know, we work in aviation on layers.
Um, that's a layer that will be absent, and that will make it really hard, I
think, particularly the hierarchy of the act which we support.
Um, if that's missing at the top, it's gonna be very difficult to give effect to it
underneath.
Okay. Thank you.
Okay. Thanks a lot, team. Uh, thank you for your submission, and I'll forever
remember your toothpaste analogy. We'll take that away.
Um-
Thanks
... and I appreciate that you coming before us today. Thank you.
Kia ora. Thank you very much. Yeah. Bye now.
Right. We will now move to the Historic Places
Aotearoa.
Can you-
Hi, Elizabeth. We can hear you.
Oh.
Just need your camera on, and we can, fire into this.
There you go. Excellent. Welcome, Elizabeth.
Welcome.
We've got 15 minutes with you this morning, so if you can use the beginning of that
to talk to your, specific points you wish to, and we'll have some questions for
you at the end. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Kia ora koutou.
Um, I'm Elizabeth Pascheff, and I'm the president of Historic Places
Aotearoa, which represents about 25
community-based heritage organizations.
And thank you very much for this opportunity to speak to our
submission. First of all, I really want to say,
that historic heritage is not just a nice to have, it's vitally
important for the, identity and wellbeing of
communities and nationally. Um, and without knowing
about our past, represented by our hi- historic heritage,
we really can't know where we're going in the future.
Um, we, we acknowledge that New Zealand needs more,
houses, better infrastructure, and a stronger economy, but these do
rely on a stable, healthy environment.
Consequently, the protection and restoration of the
environment, which includes historic heritage, in the
face of climate change, needs to be the lens in
which the reforms are assessed.A healthy
environment and healthy communities are the foundations of a
healthy economy, and our overriding concern is that
the bills ensure good outcomes for both historic
heritage and the natural environment in a world with
c- a ch- a changing climate. We're also very concerned
that both bills dilute the RMA's long-standing
protections for Māori interests defined in the T- Te
Tiriti o Waitangi. There should be clear obligations to
uphold treat- the treaty principles, provide for Māori
kaitiakitanga, and respect for the existing treaty
settlements
in the new bills. Landscapes are
important elements in understanding New Zealand's history and
cultures, which combine the natural and physical
resources identified in the current definition of historic
heritage. Moreover, a landscape lens links
the planning and natural environment bills together.
So we think that, a fifth point,
landscapes, should be added to the definition of
historic heritage in both bills.
There is no sig- definition of significance or
significant in the planning bill.
Significance changes over time, and depending on
the viewpoint of the person or group
determining its significance. We c- And we think that the
s- the qualifier significant should be removed from historic
heritage wherever it appears in the
bill.
It's very difficult to comment on the bill in the absence of national
policy direction as the bill is generic and enabling,
not specific. It would've been very useful to have had a draft p-
national policy state, direction available when the bill was
ta- tabled. We would like national policy direction
and national standards on historic heritage to be produced
as, as a matter of urgency. It should also
be... These, these documents should be, must be
developed by an independent advisory group of community and iwi
representatives and qualified and experienced heritage
experts.
The regulatory relief framework put forward in these bills
is punitive.
We think that there should be r- we sh- there should be regard to the
relevant entries on Heritage New Zealand's list, and roll over
existing heritage schedules without requirement for regulatory
relief. There should be, the requirement for
TAs to create a re- relief framework for any specified
rule that would have a significant impact on the reasonable use of private
land should be removed. The m- It would be far more
productive to encourage incentives to assist landowners
to protect their historic
heritage. The regional
spolice, regional, the regional spatial
plan is going to be an important feature of the
new framework. Con- currently, historic heritage is
not included. Areas of high heri- heritage value should
be included in the purpose so that historic heritage is taken
into account at a strategic level in planning,
development, and infrastructure to avoid conflicts further
down the track.
Aesthetically and attractive
character areas and historic heri- heritage places are
draw cards for tourists. The economies of cities like
Napier and Oamaru are dependent on the aesthetic
qualities of both their historic heritage areas and their character
areas. Needs to be clarified that TAs
can regulate the internal and external layout of buildings on a
site, and the visual amenity of a building in relation to its
character and appearance for historic heritage
sites.
The bill also narrowly,
significantly narrows the, the scope for involvement in resource
consent decisions. We think that the definition
in the interpretation section of a qualifying person
resident needs to include a person other than a natural person with an
interest in greater than the general population,
similar to the wording in se- Schedule 3, Clause 17 (1)
. This is because many smaller councils do
not have a heritage person in their team, and they rely
heavily on,
they rely heavily on, people
in the community to support the heritage provisions in the,
in their she-
plans. We m- need to have
explicit requirements for monitoring and reporting on the f-
in relation to historic heritage in the
bill. We do support the reform of the
Resource Management Act, but, but not in its
present form. We consider the separation of the
natural environment from the planning bill to be short-sighted, a short-sighted
division in the face of climate change and current econo-
environmental reality. The bills need to be reframed to
elevate the environment, which includes historic
heritage, over the economy. Historic heritage is a
significant element in the construction and fabric of our national
identity, and important for the wellbeing of communities.
It also makes a vital contribution to our tourism sector and
earns New Zealand many millions of dollars every year.
Denigrating and ignoring historic heritage, the
landscape surrounding these heritage areas, places, and
sites, and the many communities who support the retention
and en- enhancement of our valued places is not a
function of good government, and certainly does not support the
economy.Thank you very much
Thank you very much, Elizabeth. We'll go straight into questions, and the first one
from Cameron Luxton.
Oh, thank you, Chair, and thank you Elizabeth for your submission.
Uh,
coming to the relief framework, parts of your submission,
both, like, orally now and, and also in your written submission,
you've said create... it would be far more productive to encourage,
owners to protect heritage, and in your s- written submission you've said,
to encourage, what was it? Uh,
incentives. Um, we've also had other submitters
say there needs to be positively framed regulation.
These, these... How... Could you just explain what's, what would be
different, in your, view of
how, an encouragement, an
incentive, or a positive regulation,
how would that differ from providing a regulatory
relief, to, for somebody to be,
sort of paid, either through, rates relief or
otherwise, to maintain a historic place that's been put
on their, property bec- to
help the, the community aesthetic?
Rates relief is fine. That, that would be one of the things that we would
really encourage, rates relief. Um, but I don't kn- so
the, the point is, we don't really completely understand,
what, what is intended by this, bill.
And, and it's much more positive to give people,
things like tax, tax reductions and rates
relief, and also to provide things like Heritage Equip, which
was an old... which was one of the, things that Heritage New
Zealand used to have for people with, heritage buildings.
So they could apply for funding to assist them with some of the
renovations needed in their build- for their buildings to keep them looking
good.
Okay. So, so I'm, I'm not hear- I'm hearing you, respond positively to the
idea of a, a regulatory relief could be rates reduction.
It could be.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
Okay.
I'm not, I'm not against the whole idea of, of reg-
Mm-hmm
... you know, of-
Yeah
... that sort of thing. It's just that it, it shouldn't be punitive, and it
shouldn't be too heavy on the TAs, 'cause, you know, they're
really poverty-stricken.
Thank you.
It would be quite good for the government to do a little bit of
relieving.
Good point. Right. Any, any remaining questions from members?
It appears not. Well, Elizabeth, thank you very much for the good submission that
you provided both today and in writing. We appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak.
Very good.
Bye-bye.
Bye-bye. Okay. Um, moving now to the Herne Bay Residents
Association.
Hi, Don. I can see you there. There we are.
Your camera's on and, uh-
Hi
... you're unmuted now. Welcome, Don.
Oh, thank you.
Thank you for coming before us today.
We've got 15 minutes allocated for you this morning, so if you,
use that to talk to your points in the first instance, then we'll have questions
towards the end. Thank you.
Yeah, sure. Um, hey, I'm, I'm chair of the Herne Bay Residents
Association, a group in, in Herne Bay who,
who, get together and, and try and, do
stuff that's helpful to the local residents.
Um, we've submitted on only one aspect of this bill.
Um, we've referred to section part
2, section 14 (1) of the bill. Um, that section's
quite clear. It says that, "A person exercising or performing a function,
duty, or power under this Act who is considering the effects of an
activity
must disregard, e, the visual amenity
of a use, development, or building in relation to its
character, appearance, aesthetics, qualities, or other physical
feature." So this means that a local
authority cannot take into account what's known as a
streetscape, what a structure will look like from the street
view, when considering a proposed construction.
So this means that a, it's a great change
for heritage and character areas.
Local authorities have ensured these areas are maintained by ensuring the view
from the street continues to reflect the architectural style
of the specific area, and under this proposed legislation, this will
no longer be possible. Um, and over time,
this will weaken the relevant heritage and character ambiance until it's
diminished or irrelevant. The
only possible exemption for streetscape is under part 2,
which reads, "as
sites of significant historical heritage".
This does not apply to groups of structures, just to sites, so
it's not suitable for protecting special character ambiance
areas. So we're not talking about a single building here, we're talking about a
group of them, because they, the group create the
ambiance. This is directly opposite to laws
governing Western developed nations.
In the UK, Western Europe, Australia, and the US, these areas
are strongly protected, and in some cases, government subsidies are
available to ensure exteriors of the structures are maintained in good
order. By way of example, in Sydney, Australia, The Rocks with its
cobbled lanes and its late 18th century period sandstone
buildings, and Millers Point next door with its Georgian and
Vilis- Victorian terraces, historic pubs, and
buildings reflecting early Sydney maritime history, or
Glebe with its 19th century Victorian terrace-
terraces and, and cottages, Paddington with its narrow streets
and the largest complete area of Victorian terrace housing in the world,
and Woollahra with its Victorian and multi-brick Edwardian era so-called
Federation-style homes, and Balmain and Birchgrove, which are
characterized by 19th century...Workers'
cottages, villas, and some early Sydney industrial ar- area and,
and maritime structures. All these areas are very strongly
protected with visual amenity streetscape
an integral part of those protections.
Melbourne and other Australian cities too have strongly protected
historic character areas. It's difficult to imagine the
Rocks in Sydney with a limited number of period buildings or Paddington with a
limited number of Victorian terrace housing, with perhaps some high-rise close
by or settled in amongst it. The interest,
atmosphere, and ambiance would be gone.
That's why the heritage character and streetscape controls in Sydney are
so strong. Streetscape view is very important.
Um, a recent study by Auckland University masters
student, a copy of which is attached to our original submission,
concludes that Auckland characters areas are a taonga and a
grouping of Victorian, Edwardian
structures of global importance.
Not to mention the spiritual connection that we all have
that our forebears f-five, six, seven generations
ago built.
Surely there must be a better way to deal with our heritage and character than
making it unlawful for local authorities.
This is unlawful for local authorities to consider visual amenity as
a matter which may be taken into account to protect them.
If there's a good reason for removing some areas of he- from heritage or character
protection for, say, intensification, then this can be done in a
consultative manner rather than by an outright ban.
So the Herne Bay Residents Association is requesting
that Part 2, Section 14 (1)
of the bill is removed and replaced by this clause, which exempts
heritage and character areas, 14 (2) ,
any heritage or special character area which is identified
in the Auckland Unitary Plan or any district plan
or any replacement district plan be added to the
current proposed legislation. So that, that's what
we'd like. That we'd like that Part 2, Section 14
changed and replaced with, the
f version of that. So,
so yeah. So that's me, and I've also got here,
Sally. Um, and Sally's gonna talk now, a little
bit, a bit more detail about, heritage and, and the development
of,
the Auckland cities in, in relation to, to,
to, to the heritage itself. So is
Sally available?
So Sally, I can see you on the screen there.
If you could, turn your camera on and unmute yourself, that'd be
great.
Just so you're still on mute.
I think it might be on the bottom left.
Yeah, bottom left by the audio.
There we go.
Perfect.
Is that it now?
Away you go, Sally.
Yes. Um, kia ora koutou. Thanks for this
opportunity to be part of Herne Bay's presentation.
Um, I'm the chair of the Character Coalition, which is an
Auckland-wide organization of over 65
members of, of historical organizations, heritage
groups, residents associations, and special interest groups like
the Tree Council and Friends of Maungawhau.
So we cover the whole gamut of character, not just
built heritage. But our special character areas are very
important to us, and that's one of our main features and
certainly why we're supporting Herne Bay in their request to
remove that clause of the new
legislation. Um, Auckland's characters areas have been
included in and protected in our city plans since the
1990s. During that time, residents
and owners of those properties have spent a great deal of
time and money ensuring that both their own homes
and their neighborhood retain the characteristics that define their
area, while at the same time bringing their homes up to contemporary
living standards. So you'll see across the whole of Auckland
character buildings that have been pushed out at the back and have nice modern
kitchens and, and bathrooms and things and, and so they--
those buildings are not old and derelict.
People often quote them in the media as saying, "Oh, they're, you know, they're
150 years old," as if that is, is a point
against them. But in fact, a lot of those homes have been,
modernized while still retaining their street
appeal.
Um,
the groups that make up the coalition represent many of these owners and
residents, and Herne Bay is obviously a member of the coalition.
Um, so we're very concerned with the same clause that
Herne Bay have brought to you. The direction to de-
to decision-makers to disregard visual amenity is, in
our view, an excessive and unjustified overreach
that impacts directly upon long-standing community
expectations, that people in those areas and the
rest of the city have the expectation that those
special character areas will remain that way.
And so this legislation cuts right across that community
expectation. A quality urban
environment depends on a careful equilibrium between
individual development ambitions and the shared
characteristics that make neighborhoods livable and
desirable. Auckland special character areas have been
deliberately and carefully protected for generations,
as, as Don mentioned, and these protections have never
prevented sensible intensification or well plan-
planned and well-designed developments in the appropriate
locations. Public
sentimentReinforces this point.
There has been widespread opposition to recent top-down planning
interventions, such as Auckland's Plan Change 78, which
radically altered density rules.
This achieved nothing but ugly three by threes, and I'm sure everybody
in Auckland knows what I mean by three by threes,
scattered randomly throughout Auckland, and often
located remotely from good transportation, workplaces, and
other amenities.
The,
in terms of intensification and quality of life, it has been an
outstanding failure, Plan Change 78, both in process and
outcome. Plan Change 120 has attracted a
record number of submissions, so that's the one that took over from Plan Change
78 when the government changed the legislation.
Over 10 and a half thousand people submitted on
Plan Change, 120. That's more than submitted on the unitary
plan.
Many of which, ask that our special character
areas remain intact.
We support, the character coalition and Herne Bay included,
we support intensification done well.
This means it must be well designed and in the right
places. Stripping character and amenity values from
planning considerations will be the death knell for Auckland's
unique stock of timber Victorian and E-
Edwardian character homes. It will disenfranchise our
communities, erase our ability to shape the places we
live in, and seriously diminish the quality of
life for those who live in Auckland.
It disregards the deep importance residents place on neighborhood
character, and treats legitimate local concerns as
obstacles rather than inputs. There's no
justification for disregarding it
wholesale, particularly when natural landscapes
continue to enjoy sto- strong statutory
protection. Balanced, workable
legislation is entirely achievable, yet this
bill simply chooses not to pursue it.
Our character suburbs and their unique streetscapes
belong to everyone. It's not for one
generation. One generation doesn't have the
right to destroy those areas. Future
generations will be appalled if we allow this to
happen. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you very much. Anything further, Don?
Uh, no, that, that's all. Uh, is there any questions?
Any, any questions from members? I think you've been very, succinct in
your written submission and your submission today about the, amendments you
wish to be made to the, planning bill.
Uh, it doesn't appear that we have any questions.
Don't take that as, as not being interested in the submission.
I think it's sort of-
Your Honor, Mr. Chair.
Oh, there we go. Julie, Julie Anne. Yes.
Thank you very much for your submission.
I just, I just wanted to ask, about the recommended
addition to the legislation
about recognizing the special character areas.
Um, I, I would think that would be quite unusual to put it in the primary
legislation. I understand the point of what you're asking, but,
it seems to me that it would be more
likely that that recognition would be recognized
through national planning instruments as opposed to
directly in the legislation.
Um-
I'm just wondering what you think about that.
Yeah. I think the problem that we have with it is that, that, that
the Part 2 Section 14 (1) currently says that,
any activity must disregard the visual amenity of a use.
So-
Oh, yes, I understand removing that part.
It's just specifically referring to a current planning
document in the primary legislation would be unusual.
Yes.
But, can you think of... I mean...
Well, you could, we could just say any, any, any, any area, I guess.
Um, but I, I, I think that
the, the council,
organization would, would decide what was heritage or special character, and
that should be up to them. Um,
but I think there needs to be a mechanism for, for them to step in and say,
"Well, hang on, we've designated this area a special character, so we
require this or that." It doesn't have to...
I guess it doesn't have to state that in the actual legislation, but
there needs to be a mechanism to that.
Because otherwise what happens is that if somebody was to go through
a planning process and end up, un- in front
of some com- commissioner hearing over a resource consent, or whatever it's
going to be called, application, it'll come down to the underlying law,
and this is the underlying law of it.
So, no matter what the council will say that is their
policy, that, the argument in that, forum
would, would, would relate back to the actual, the
underlying legislation. So that's why the underlying legislation needs to have a
mechanism of some sort to enable the council to
impose whatever restrictions they wanted to.
I mean, it might not be a special character thing.
It might be someone might do something that is really unsightly that, that...
or, or, or there might be something about it that, that is an unintended
consequence of there being no control.
So, that goes back to the
visual thing. So, and you agreed on that.
So yes, I'm, I'm not sure. Um, what, what do you think, Sally?
Have you-
Yeah. I think, I think Julie Anne brings up a good point.
But we get the, the impetus of your submission-
Mm-hmm
... and we'll absolutely be taking that into consideration with, uh-
Hey
... with that. But Julie Anne does bring up a good point. But thank you.
Hey, our time's actually come to an end.
Don and Sally, we appreciate you coming before us, this morning. Thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Tha- thank you, David. Appreciate the opportunity.
Okay.
Thank you.
Have a good day.
Thank you.Right, we'll move now to the, New
Zealand Minerals Council.
Hello, Josie.
Good morning.
Good morning, Josie. We've got 15 minutes allocated for you,
your, your time this morning. You, use the beginning of it how you see fit,
and, we'll have some questions towards the end. Thank you.
Sure. Thank you. I, thanks for, uh including us.
We, we did think it was important that we had the opportunity to, make an
oral submission. I'm the chief executive of the New Zealand Minerals
Council, and we, represent the mining
industry. I have got my policy person coming, so he might appear at some
point. Um, I would like to just make some comments and then leave
time for questions. Um, further to
our written submission, today we would like to speak to the outcomes we would
like to see from this law change, and to make, that's to make it
enduring and fit for purpose. And we
will add a couple of points that we believe need to be highlighted.
We see the role of those within Parliament is to get this right,
so we won't be giving specific rewriting suggestions.
I know how annoying that can be. Like many submitters, we are not
sure the purpose and intent of this resource
management, reform have been appropriately captured yet,
and this is the essential framework.
There are a couple of significant flaws that impact the framework that cannot be
overlooked.
Firstly, we are unsure why there are two bills, with
two different purpose statements and a lack of integration between
the two bills. This is, Jeremy Harding, who's just
arrived. And the second point is the national instruments, which will
be drafted after the bills are passed.
So submitters cannot be fully informed on what s- on many aspects of
the proposed regime. So essentially we're being asked
to buy a half-finished house. It could turn out to be the home of our
dreams, but equally it could be a dodgy leaking building that no one
can live in. We are in no doubt that the existing
resource management law is too risk averse and frank- frankly
adversarial,
where planning and environment law do go hand in hand, but there must be
balance, and previously the scales have tipped heavily on the
environmental side and not enough on the side of overall benefits to
people and the economy. The rules and guardrails of the new
system need to allow for managing those tensions with evidence,
science, engineering and technology.
What we would like to see from this reform is law that leaves scope for innovation,
has some flexibility to facilitate the best outcomes all
around, and allows for progress in building a country for the
future. We believe these bills as presented are an
improvement on the existing system, but it is also our view that they are
perhaps designed to benefit smaller urban projects and are focused on
today's housing and infrastructure issues when the legislation
needs to be enduring. It must equally have provisions for
the primary industries, including mining, and we have highlighted that in our
written submission regarding the goals in the planning bill.
We recommend that the goals be made more explicit about en-
enabling mineral extraction.
While a cookie cutter approach will suit some areas of development at the
smaller end of the scale, mines are large projects with many
parts. Making some of the approvals processes more
generic and easy to navigate will free up decision makers to tackle the more
complex development projects, but the law also needs to allow for a
holistic a- approach to those projects.
That is why the Fasttrack Approvals Act is so ideal for large
projects, because it allows for a one-stop shop approach
where the project can be looked at in its entirety and decisions can be made at
that level. It has been proven not to be the rubber stamp that some
critics said it would be.
And it is why we strongly advocate for a case by case approach in the assessment of
projects that has both enabled mining and had
desirable environmental outcomes, often in partnership with
government or community organizations.
We'd like to make some more specific comments.
The outdated Wildlife Act from 1953 is
the bane of all development. With this law in the mix, lizards
in this country have a better life than many people, certainly on mine
sites. They get rehomed if their original home is disturbed,
and they get excellent healthcare. I kid you not.
And that's all lizards, not just ones that are threatened or might need some
special treatment. Where a resource management consent is
obtained that manages effects on indigenous wildlife, there should be no
need for a separate wildlife permit to be obtained for that same
activity. The duplication is obvious and should be removed, and this
should apply to both bills.
This needs to be a certainty in the legislation and not subject to
words such as may, as per Clause 128 of the Natural
Environment Bill, which says, quote, "A natural resource permit
may per- include a wildlife approval," end quote,
without explaining when or how this might occur and the
criteria that will apply.
Zoning concerns us because of the unique aspects of
minerals. Minerals lie where they lie, thanks to centuries of
geological processes. So sp- spatial planning carries some
risk for mining. We fully support the use of mining
zones, but we also believe pro- pro- proposed zones
within regional spatial plans must not preclude mining
from occurring within those zones that are not spec-
specifically designated for that purpose.
This is a too prescriptive approach and there needs to be scope for future
prospecting and discovery as the world's need for minerals changes and
increases.On environmental
limits, many submitters have talked about these, and we will add to
that. Environmental limits are a blunt instrument in a
nuanced world, and we do not think they are a, a useful
tool for managing environmental outcomes.
Environmental limits do not work for mining in the way they are proposed
in this legislation, and we do not support them.
They may be counterproductive if they prevent the holistic assessment of an
activity. There needs to be flexibility in the way
environmental limits are applied.
Mines employ an environmental approach that allows
for the best possible outcomes by using an effects
hierarchy. That starts with avoid, then
moves through remedy, mitigate, offset, and where none of that is
possible, compensation. The biggest threat to
indigenous biodiversity is introduced pest species and
predators. Mines have a long history of spending considerable
time and money and working with others to manage pests and predators
and restore indigenous flora and fauna.
We have noted there are significant risks that environmental limits will end up
being too stringent to be workaba- workable, thereby
stifling development or making it, it impossible, which is not the
intent of these bills.
We are not asking for a lowering in standards in environmental limits,
we are asking for more flexibility.
Something we did not include in our written submission, but would like to cover
now, as it has also been raised by other submitters, is
direct referrals. We do not agree with the removal of the
ability for the Environment Court to consider direct
referrals. We are not sure what the problem that is trying to be solved
is with this removal. The process works well for smaller projects that want
a quick outcome. So overall, we hope
to see more explicit consideration of mining and its unique requirements
in this law reform to ensure we don't sterilize any
resources unintentionally. We believe the
FastTrack Act, Approvals Act 2024 has many aspects that
address the complexities of large scale projects.
We would like to see some of its successful aspects, such as the one-stop shop
approach of a single body being responsible for granting all of the
approvals required for a single project, continued through this
legislation. Thanks very much, and we are happy to take any
questions.
Okay. Thank you very much. Yeah, we'll move straight to Priyanka.
Thank you. Um, and thanks for your submission.
I've got a question around, on the point that you made around
wildlife, permits and the duplication there.
Um, but I also found interesting the point you made around,
the balance having swung too far towards environmental
protection previously, given that New Zealand has the highest proportion of
threatened species, in the world.
But that aside, we've heard from s- at
least one submitter who has made the point that there's only been one entity
who has complained of that duplication, between the two
permits. Um, so I'd be keen to get
a better understanding from you in terms of the number of
complaints there has been around that duplication, to your
knowledge. Um, and related to that, we have also heard the
concern that including a wildlife permit in a
resource, permit means
that those in DOC who ac- who have the expertise to be
able to provide that permit, you know, councils
don't have that expertise. So how do you, reconcile
the two?
Right. There's a lot in those questions.
Um, duplication doesn't make any sense in law as far as
we're concerned. And so with, having to
get a wildlife permit in one place and another place for the same
project doesn't make any sense to us.
So that, it's that duplication that we're saying shouldn't
exist, and that in resource
management, practice,
it's one permit that you get. So we would
prefer there to be one permit, and that it's part of
the resource management process rather than we have to go separately
to DOC again. Uh, 'cause DOC will be consulted on the, on the
permit anyway. So it's just, it's just adding more process
to, a project that can be very time
consuming anyway. So we, I, I don't know why you would
duplicate something like that.
Is DOC always consulted in resource management permits that
include a wildlife component from your...
Would they be?
I would say-
Well, they would certainly have the opportunity to at least, make a submission.
Yeah.
We, we struggled to hear that, sorry. Say that again.
Come close to the mic. But at least have the opportunity
to make a submission.
Can you hear that?
No.
They would at least have the opportunity to make a submission.
But generally-
I think that-
Mining, mining sites are big with a lot of complexities.
So the, the mining company would be working with DOC on a
number of issues anyway, particularly if it's on a, on the DOC
estate.
So it's not like we're cutting DOC out or saying to cut DOC out or, we're just
saying why duplicate process? It's, it's, it's, it's
inefficient and it's bureaucratic.
Okay. Uh, Cameron?
Uh, thank you, Chair. The question I have is about,
the expertise that goes into the spatial planning,
bill and the independent hearings and the people who assess,
resource consents. Is the Minerals Council happy with
the proposals for, expertise on these?
Uh-... panels and boards and assessors?
And what, and if, if so, great. If not, what sort of improvements
do you think, we could be looking at?
Want to comment on that, Carolyn?
Um,
I guess it's the same as what we have raised in the fast
track processes.
These are big, complex projects, and
so, for everyone's benefit,
it pays for there to be some expertise
available to, to help with
assessment. And, in councils in areas
where there's mining,
there's a bit of, there's, there is expertise.
So, yeah, the difficulty with having a bunch of
people assess
a project that's worth many millions of dollars is you
wanna want them to know what they're looking at.
And we've found with the FastTrack Act, quite a lot of time
goes into just explaining what mining is and what a mine site is
and et cetera, et cetera. So I guess
for, efficiency of process, the ideal
scenario is that there is expertise there.
Does that answer your question?
Uh, I suppose it raises it, but that was...
I'll put you on the spot there a little bit.
I guess the, the question is, how can we make, how, what
sort of changes or what could the committee be looking at to make sure that
expertise, is provided to areas where
applications for mining are being made to make sure that correct
decisions are being made? But yeah, I was just exploring what-
Well-
... ideas you had on that.
Well, there's two, there's two other parts to that.
There's the changes that are gonna happen to local government
and,
the
national direction instruments as well.
So yeah, as I say, we're sort of commenting on something that's not
complete yet, so-
Okay
... there's plenty of room for improvement.
So if there is improvement, it would definitely be that there's,
that projects, and that wouldn't be just mining, that would be
all, you know, big construction projects and everything.
You'd want some expertise in there, right?
Sure. Can, can I ask a sup on that, Chair?
Yes.
Yeah. So when developing, national instruments and national
standards, how much of a role do you think, your member
organizations should have in, say, national standard for mining,
or I'm not sure what other industries, quarrying perhaps.
How much do you think, your industry should have a, have a
representation in that development?
Well, we're very much expecting to be, involved in that
development, and we'd be pretty upset if we weren't.
Um,
so-
Okay
... yeah.
That's s- succinctly put. Appreciate it.
Okay. Any last questions from members? It appears not.
Thank you very much for coming before us today.
We appreciate the submission you've given verbally, but also written as well.
Thank you.
Thank you so much for your time.
Cheers.
All right. We now move to the Retirement Villages Association of New
Zealand. And
I can see both Jo and Michelle there.
If you continue your camera still, that's good.
Michelle and Jo.
Kia ora. Kia ora koutou. Thank you very much.
Um, we understand you've got a, a heck of a lot on today.
Um, I'm Michelle Palmer, the executive Retirement Villages
Association of New Zealand, otherwise known as the
RVA. Uh, we represent the owners,
developers, and managers of 96% of registered
retirement villages in New Zealand.
And, we're very grateful for the opportunity to speak to you on the two bills
today. Um, retirement villages are a
key part of New Zealand's housing and care system for older people, and there
is a severe lack of appropriate housing and care for our growing aging
population, as I'm sure you're all aware.
This problem is immediate, and it's projected to worsen over the coming
decades. So our message today is, is quite
simple. Um, the new resource management system must be better
at enabling retirement villages to deliver the accommodation and care that older
New Zealanders need. In our view, the
current resource management system contributes to the retirement housing and
care crisis in three main ways. Planning rules
are inconsistent and can be overly restrictive.
There is too much weight placed on amenity and design rather than
real environmental effects and outcomes, and consenting is
way too slow, too costly, and too
uncertain. So the combined effect of those means that the
current system makes it harder, slower, and more expensive to deliver
retirement village housing and care at exactly the time that New
Zealand needs more of it. So as you'll have seen
in our submission, we support many of the initiatives in the bills,
particularly reforms that, enable a nationally consistent
planning regime for retirement villages
that create a more enabling system, system for development,
reduce consenting burden and complexity, and focus on
genuine effects and disregard amenity and design
matters. We also support aspects of the bill
that enable infrastructure, because infrastructure is a
key enabler of retirement village development.
I think it's really important to note that retirement villages are not just
residential property development.
Village operators do not build a village and quickly flick on the
development and walk away. Village operators are in it for the
long haul, and a recent independent report by Grant Thornton
showed it takes 20 years for a village to start making a profit.
So operators are making a long-term investment to provide a community for
older New Zealanders.Another point to note is
that many retirement villages provide a pathway to care as
we age. The only new aged care
facilities built in New Zealand in the last nine years
are those inside retirement villages.
These include rest home care, hospital level care, and dementia and memory level
care facilities. And then part of that is just
over eighty percent of those aged care beds inside retirement villages right
now are occupied by people who were not living in the village before moving into
the care. They're members of the public who need a level of care that's
provided for in those facilities.
And in most cases, the village operations subsidize the aged care
facility.
I probably don't need to say this, but I will, there is a chronic shortage of care
beds going forward. Um, and it's vital that
we know this core infrastructure continues to be invested in and built, and
it's crucial that building process is made easier.
So overall, we see these bills in an, as an important opportunity to remove
unnecessary barriers and to better enable retirement villages to build and deliver
way more h- way more housing and care that older New Zealanders
need. However, we have identified some areas in the bill that would
benefit from targeted amendments, not just tweaks, but
targeted amendments to ensure the new system successfully delivers a
simple, efficient and enabling regime.
Now, with that context, I'm now gonna hand over to Joe Bartley, who
lives and breathes the planning world in his role as Senior Development Manager at
Metlife Care, and Joe will take you through the crucial
specific changes that we're seeking.
Thanks, Michelle. Kia ora, everybody.
Uh, as Michelle mentioned, I'm Joe Bartley, and I'm here,
on behalf of Metlife Care and the RVA, and I'm a Senior Development Manager
working on, on a number of our large scale developments.
Uh, the submission covers all the changes the RVA is seeking.
I'm here to bring to your attention the key amendments the RVA is requesting in its
submission. I'll kick off sort of with Clause
fourteen, effects outside
the scope of the act.
Several amendments are requested under Clause fourteen, relating to building
layouts, visual amenity, and special character.
Of particular note
is the one around building layouts.
While the RVA supports excluding consideration of the internal and
external layout of buildings, many of the challenges the sector
faces arise when councils attempt to control on-site amenity
matters. The inclusion of a single example in the planning
bill for the provision of private open space could lead to councils
taking a narrower interpretation, imposing design
requirements that may not be relevant or perversely lead to poorer design outcomes
for retirement villages.
Matters such as private open space are best determined by the operator, who can
take an integrated approach to the design of a village.
This integrated approach typically considers the design and location of on-site
care, as Michelle sort of referred to earlier, indoor and outdoor
resident amenities, and the various units or unit
typologies that are on offer in, in any given village.
Moreover, the operator also has an inherent understanding of
the needs of residents and the operational requirements of retirement village
developments. The RVA requests the single example
in the planning bill be expanded to refer other design features and standards that
are often subject to plan rules.
The next one is National Standards, Clause fifty-eight or
sixty. The RVA supports the development of national
standards, a particularly a consistent set of standards for
retirement villages. We believe this would significantly
simplify the resource management system and help address current
inconsistencies in how retirement villages are enabled or contemplated in
plans. In many cases, councils take a ve- take very
different approaches as to how retirement villages are
treated. This creates uncertainty and unnecessary complexity
for retirement village developments.
The RVA requests the planning bill be amended to require national
standards on housing.
Regional spatial plans. The RVA generally supports the intent
behind regional spatial plans. We consider that
spatial plans have considerable potential to support a more coordinated and
enabling approach to land use and development.
However, spatial planning often focuses on the needs of the
majority, and in doing so can sometimes fail to adequately
provide for all parts of the community, such as older people, for older
people. Retirement village developments typically
involve larger consolidated parcels of land, whether they
be greenfield land or brownfield land,
an integrated master planning approach that considers the design of the land and
built form simultaneously, and the optimal location of
on-site care and amen- and amenities.
For this reason, it is essential that councils provide an opportunity for
retirement village operators when developing regional spatial
plans. The RVA recommends cons- consultation with affected
stakeholders be mandatory.
This sort of consultation is important to ensure spatial plans provide for the
needs of all future development, including RV
operators. Uh, consents, Part
four of the planning bill, and the National Environment bill
relates to consents and permits and the registration of permitted
activities.
The RVA supports a more permissive resource management system, particularly where
activities are already anticipated within the relevant
zone. However, requiring permitted activities to be
registered with councils risks this process becoming a de facto consenting
process. This has the potential to create unnecessary
cost and time pressures. The RVA requests amendments to the planning
bill to address this issue.
Lastly, private plan changes. The RVA supports the
continued existence of the private plan change
pathway.However, there is a concern about the
ability for councils to reject a private plan change on the basis
it would make a land use plan inconsistent with the regional spatial
plan, rather than considering that private plan change on its
merits. A regional plan and a private plan change
serve fundamentally different purposes.
A spatial plan is intended to guide development for the needs of majority,
whereas a private plan change enables specific land use and development
opportunities that councils may not otherwise provide
for. The other-- The RVA requests amendment to the
planning bill to recognize that private plan changes will often be consi-
inconsistent
with the regional spatial plan, but yet acknowledge that it is still a relevant
consideration. Thank you.
And we're happy to take questions.
You're on mute, Mr Chair.
Sorry. Away you go, Priyanka.
Thanks. Um,
thank you. I've got a question that
relates to the section in your written submission,
around exceptions to environmental limits.
Um, your recommendation there, you've, you've made the case that it
often gets in the way of development for the
RVA, and have suggested specific
recommendations. Um, and yet it's,
it's, you know, it's pretty, pretty clear there's a fair bit of evidence that New
Zealand's lost about ninety percent of our wetlands over
time. The recommendation you have, in the, in your
submission,
would you agree that that would further reduce protections for
wetlands? Um, understand and take your point for the
need for balance, but how is this
balance if it further reduces the wetlands that we
have?
Michelle, do you wanna, start the response and I can follow
through, or...?
I mean, we do want to, protect wetlands, that goes without
saying. But I think from what Joe was saying is there is a mix
across and, across, you know, where, where the
different plans are crossing over each other.
And, Joe, do you wanna talk specifics
around-
Yeah. Yeah, look, I think, you know, I think the, the, key word
is balance, Priyanka. I think,
you know, there is a need to sort of,
provide a sort of considered view around the protection or
management or, or the offset of, of
wetlands. Um,
but that, that sort of needs... Oh.
And that, you know, we
also understand that there is a need to protect where there is outstanding
features, where there are, significant sort of natural features or outstanding
features that need to be considered as part of any development.
Um, but at the same time-
So just-
We feel as if-
Sorry to interrupt you. I, I, I, I get the need for balance, and I totally
agree with that. I'm just asking how, given that your
recommendation specifically would reduce
the wetland protections that we have that I would
think is already watered down in this legislation.
You're asking for it to be further minimized.
How do you then-- how does that fit with your goal or your view
to protect wetlands? What would, what would you do to offset
the lowered protections?
Um, I think that that would need to be considered as
part of sort of any future applications.
And, and I think the broad-- the definition of wetland can be quite broad.
And where sometimes that-- the sector or
development may be, caught up in that process
is where you've got sort of low level wetlands being treated as significant
wetlands, and then being sort of caught under that umbrella of definitions.
And that may be an artificial wetland or a ma-- or, or a drain that's been
classed as a wetland. And I think-
I see
... and that sort of balance between ensuring that, you know, there is a focus on
protecting significant
natural features, but at the same time ensuring that if there are lower level
water courses or wetlands or farm drains that have been deemed as wetlands, that,
you know, there, there's a, there's an assessment that's commiserate to that sort
of class of natural feature. Um, I suppose for our submission,
we're just seeking that balance, um-
Okay. Thanks
... in the Act or Planning Bill and the Natural Environment Bill.
Okay. Any last questions from members?
It appears not. Thank you very much, Michelle and Joe, for coming before us today.
We appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you for your time.
Cheers. Members, we'll move now to Kiwi Rail
Holdings Limited.
I can see, David and, Maria on online, if we can
have your cameras turned
on.
Got Maria. Hello, David.
Good morning.
Good morning. And we've got Michelle with you as well.
Yeah.
So I see Michelle with you as well. She can join as well.
I can't tell. Am I visible?
We can see you. We can see you both-
Okay.
And we can hear you both.
Excellent. Thank you.
So David, if you're gonna start, we've got 15 minutes allocated for your time.
Uh, just leave some time at the end for any questions we may have.
So thank you, David.
Okay. Absolutely. Thank you, Chair.
Uh, I will be very brief in my, in my comments, and
I'll leave it to my expert colleagues to answer most of the general questions.
But to be clear, we support the aims of the bill to enable provision of
infrastructure. So our, our submission focuses
on, on that goal as opposed to a number of the other elements which may
be relevant to the bills.
Uh-We,
we think, we acknowledge
the fact that there are benefits for the separation between the
two pieces of legislation, but we did, do believe there
ought to be some clear guidance, particularly within the bills thems- within
the acts themselves when passed, regarding how the interface between
the, the two acts works for infrastructure services.
At the moment it looks like it's going to rely either on guidance notes
or something of that nature, and it feels a little bit uncertain as currently
drafted. I'm happy to assist with that.
Uh, we are uncertain about the
requirement to register permitted activities
in the way that it is done. W-we're not quite sure what the benefit is
of that. And note that if there are specific activities that, that this is
intended to address, we suggest confining the requirements too.
So I'm on para eight, nineteen and twenty of, of our
submission. We certainly support
streamlining the approach to consenting, and we have in our appendix
A s- put forward a number of detailed suggestions as to how
that, that might be, might be done, and that's, we'll leave that to the
drafters' consideration. W-we talk a little bit
about the linear infras-- ensuring linear infrastructure as a central
focus. I think the goal at the moment talks
about infrastructure being provided for, provide
for. We believe the wording ought to be enabled, which
is a more active ten- is the active
tense, which says the objective of the thing is to
enable the end of thing, not just the provision for.
We also believe the infrastructure goal should relate to the protection of
existing infrastructure from third party activities, and generally
what we're getting at there is res-reverse sensitivity for the
most part.
It's... The bill seems to focus a lot
on urban areas, which sort of
a-acknowledged in the sense of the demand for infrastructure, et cetera.
But, you know, we operate out of fo- we operate in forty plus,
territorial local authority areas, and it's a little bit
unclear how that's gonna work in the rural zones where
a lot of our linear infrastructure exists.
I think there's a need for some clarity in there.
We certainly support the improvements to the efficiency of the designation process.
Uh,
we
have...
I think I'm back. Uh-
Yeah.
We ha- we, we note that there's concurrent work going
on amendments to the Public Works Act and, the, the
carryover of Section one eight five of the, of the RMA
seems to us to be still a little bit loose, relative
to what's under the Public Works Act, in particular, you know,
the, at what point the courts can, require compulsory
acquisition. We'd also like to suggest
that to simplify the designation process,
extensions for, to, applications to extend the lapse
date can be made at the same time as any other amendments or at least a year
before la-lapse. At the present moment, your
ability to do so is very much time-bound
and related to the, the, the almost expiry
date when we believe these things should be able to start much, much
earlier. We, and if we
go to the Natural Environment Bill, there isn't an
equivalent goal relating to infrastructure in the Natural
Environ- Environment Bill, and we believe,
there ought to be some equivalen- some equivalency of the
goal. A somewhat more obscure point is
that, the, the wording around,
net loss indigenous
biodiversity, when you've got a, a, when you've got
basically a very, long and, and skinny corridor,
very challenging f- to, to see
how, how that, that process will actually, will actually
work and what are the implications are for that.
We'd like to work that through a little bit further.
Uh, two final points... one
final point. We do support the inclusions of requirements for councils to
set limits, but we think the NEB needs to
provide some clearer guidance on how these factors are to be weighted
so a consistent nationwide approach can be applied, particularly for, important
for us as we exist in forty plus, territorial local
authorities. I'll just ask my colleagues, Maria or
Michelle, if they have anything to add, otherwise we'll open up to the committee
for questions.
Just one additional point that I was gonna make is that we strongly support the
concept of spatial planning. Um, spatial planning is certainly a way to
long-term provide for infrastructure.
Um, and it's lit-- it is essential to ensuring that we can
c- we're, not just we, but our colleagues in infrastructure, in communities and
regions can see what's on the cards.
But the process for that to happen, at the moment it's unclear from the
bill, and that's still to be developed, but, there are suggestions
in terms of some of the information required that it would be, it sounds like it's
almost similar to a, a consenting process at the moment, and that would defeat
the purpose of route protection if you need all the information now for something
that will happen in twenty to thirty years' time.
So those processes all need to tie in together, as well as,
the approaches to
P-PWA and the triggers for taking of land, and that, that's set out in more
detail in our submission. Um, ha- Michelle, unless you've got
any other comments, we're happy to answer
questions.
Thank you very much to, to you all for, your
submission. A really interesting area to,
you know, consider. Um, and you've also raised,
issues around environmental limits.
Um, you touched on it there. I'm just wondering whether you could just elaborate a
little further, on that and the practical kind of
application if that was to go ahead.
Maria or Michelle-
Yep
... could you to, to respond. Thank you, one of you two.
No, I'm happy to start.
I'm happy to, I'm happy to and then Michelle can fill in.
Michelle's our RMA team leader, so she's the person on the ground that's dealing
with these on a day-to-day basis. Um, I mean, in terms of environmental
limits, it, it's got... there's got to be a clear process for setting them and
understanding how they apply, and the framework within they work, within which they
work within. 'Cause at the moment, we don't have that system, and
we don't have that process. So you need to have a robust and fair process for
setting them, and then a way to understand how activities work within them.
And it's important to make sure that it's possible for activities to, to work
within them. And a good example is, what Dave raised to the
point of no net, no net loss for
biodiversity under the Natural Environment Bill. Um, what does that apply to?
Does it apply to the corridor? Does it apply to the area?
Does it apply to the region? 'Cause to be honest, if it applied to the corridor,
we'd never be able to do anything. But certainly within a region or an area, it
could. So you just need to be clear on how these things are calculated and how they
work.
No, absolutely. And I think, I mean, it's quite interesting because, you know,
speaking from a rail perspective, 'cause we haven't really had those discussions,
yet throughout the submission process.
I mean, could you quantify like how the system's
working for rail at the moment in terms of, you know, your
infrastructure, and being able to, you know, push ahead with, you
know, some of your projects and obviously taking freight off the road and onto
rail? I mean, how, how, how has it been in terms of
the, the consenting process and the cost?
Um, so the process at the moment is working.
Um, in some councils it works better than others depending
on
practice. Um, and I mean, you can't legislate for practice,
that's not something that can happen.
But we, we do work our way through processes.
Um, some councils, the processes are quite efficient
and, don't cost a lot of money. But in, in some
councils, those processes do take, a much longer
period of time, and there is a lot of negotiation over
mitigation, compensation, and those types
of processes in terms of ecological, yeah,
restoration or any mitigation that we need to do for the likes of the loss
of a wetland. Because a lot of the works that we do are culvert
renewals, bridge renewals, and maintenance, which are all
next to waterways or next to wetlands or next to
special vegetation.
I think it's fair to say we have to have those discussions separately in every
council region.
Mm-hmm.
And so just because, for example, Auckland's taken one approach, which we may have
worked through over several months and we think works, doesn't mean that Hamilton
will take that-
Mm
... or Waikato or... You know, that, that's gotta happen in every place, which is
why spatial planning where everyone buys into some sort of baseline
and plan for the future has, has got to happen to have some efficiency
around this.
Can I offer a perspective on this? Well, clearly, Michelle, you've got more
patience than I have. Uh, the, it works
well for... in most things I agree.
Where the system currently breaks down and where we hope that the Spatial Planning
Act will, is the ability to take a very long-term view
on things like an alignment, and particularly, in
rail. The geometry of rail is such that
you can't change directions quickly, you can't sort of stop and go around a
curve. So you have to lay these things down well in
advance. And the ability to do so without having to
prove to the nth degree at the start that this is reasonably,
reasonably necessary, spatial planning is important, and the ab- and, and the
ability to plan for that. I also...
You asked me how the system works at the moment.
Uh, if I can give by way of an example, we are, we have a notice of requirement
application in to install a,
substation next to a corridor which we own.
We own the land, we own the corridor, but it's, it's not, not
currently designated. My view, and
Michelle, you can... you, I'll give you right of rebuttal, is that the
level of evidence required to be
submitted associated with that, because we can't
afford to not get the consent-
Mm
... does drive an enormous amount of cost.
And for a substation next to a railway that you're gonna use a
substation to power up the wires that drive the railway
feels to me, in my role as the chief metro and
capital program officer, to be excessive.
But I'll r- I'll go back to you, Michelle.
You can,
you can take your different slightly different approach.
Um, I would have to say that based on my 25-plus years
experience, this is just where we've got to with the
planning process in order to get projects across the line.
Yeah.
And so we've learned-
It does-
... to provide the information in order to get the
consents.
But that isn't... That sort of... That's what you have to do to play the game.
Yep. That's exactly-
It's whether... that's not really the, the issue here.
It's that, is that the game that the country wants to play?
That's correct.
A- and I guess overall, does it lead to a better outcome?
Providing more paperwork and more reports-
Mm
... does it always change, you know, what's on the table and the results of it,
particularly in a very focused location like that?
It can't go anywhere else. It's not like you're looking at greenfields.
Um, you've got limited parameters, but you're still, having to provide a level
of information and evidence and support as if it was a new activity in a
new place that had no relationship with what's going on next door.
No, look, that, clarifies that.
So thank you very much, for your submission today.
Um, and it is really, interesting to hear from a rail perspective,
and you know, what you're seeing and, and the practicalities of, you know,
the-- this legislation and how potentially it could play out.
So look, we, we appreciate your time, and the work
that's gone into the submission.
Thank you.
Th-thanks, Chair, and others.
So we now move, members to our next submitter,
who, the New Zealand Property Investors
Association.
So we'll just wait for them to pop
through.
How's that?
Yeah, we can hear you there, Matt, but we can't see you.
If you wanna pop your video on.
Yeah, there we go.
Brilliant. Welcome. We can see and hear you now, Matt.
Welcome to the Select Committee. Uh, look, you have fifteen
minutes with us, so in the essence of time, we'll hand it over to you to talk
us through your submission and then open for questions. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much, Catherine.
Um, I won't talk through our submission directly.
I assume that, you've had an opportunity to read it, but I'd just like to talk
in general, terms to it. Um, just a bit about
the New Zealand Property Investors Federation.
We represent the interests of over three hundred and seventeen thousand property
investors and landlords across Aotearoa. We're the peak body.
We operate at a national level backed by a network of seventeen different
membership associations, and we supply support, education,
and advocacy on behalf of our members and the wider property investor landlord
community. Um, pr-private residential landlords
provide the lion's share of New Zealand's rental homes, and we're committed to
working to all stakeholders to deliver a well-functioning housing market where
people who want to buy can buy and those who want or need to rent can
find decent, affordable accommodation.
We're not planning or legal experts, so our evidence, is sort of more
broad-brushed at the macro level rather than the detail and is based
in large measure on the actual experiences of our members in dealing with
consenting and planning activities.
Uh, the biggest point for us with this reform is that we really welcome any
attempt by any side of the house to make it easier, cheaper, and faster
to build homes. The situations around
development slow down the rate of house building just creates an artificial supply
constraint, which has the inevitable effect of increasing house prices
and, the cost of renting. And such a situation isn't good
for anyone. Uh, a small number of people might benefit from
the situation if they happen to buy and sell at the right time, at a time
of rapidly rising house prices, but it's no good for the
majority. And I'm talking about homeowners, property investors, landlords, whatever
you wanna call us, but also renters.
And I speak on this not just from the perspective of the overall wellbeing
of New Zealand, but from the self-interested point of view of property investors
and landlords. When house prices rise rapidly, it's almost
always as a result of some poor housing related policy, but
often property investors get the blame, and we get called all sorts of,
unusual names as we go about our business.
Um, that's no good for our people, and it's no good for the sector, and we'd love
that to change, and that's one of the reasons we support the bill.
If we can have a well-functioning housing market in which supply can meet
demand as much as it's possible to do, then property
investors/landlords can get on with the business of providing rental
accommodation, which is what we do best.
But there's always gonna be a rental market, we're always gonna need private
landlords, and we'd just love to be able to get on with providing homes for Kiwis
without the demonization and targeting with regressive taxes that
comes with a dysfunctional housing market.
Again, that's why we support the bill.
So just to make three,
lesser points before I, take some questions.
As I said, there's over three hundred and seventeen thousand investors in New
Zealand, and many of them are willing and eager to develop the properties
they own to provide more housing or more modern, warmer,
drier homes to live in. And as a country, we need
to harness that energy, not stifle it.
Now, I talk to members all around the country.
I often visit associations, and I am never short of stories
about development projects our members have planned which have taken
longer than they should have, cost more than they should have, or
both. And in many cases, projects were just given up on
because there were too many obstacles were put in the way or the cost became too
great. We need to stop doing this. And I'm really
pleased to say that I've already been contacted by members who've seen the
proposed reforms and said, "This is great.
We-we're gonna have another look at that project," or, "I'm gonna have another look
to that project, that I
abandoned." The second point I'd like to make
is to urge, members of Parliament to work together to
forge a non-partisan consensus on RMA reform and other housing
policy. Um, and you know, I note that the work of
the previous labor done by the Honorable Phil Twyford to bring about
changes to the planning system to increase housing supply, and we applaud
that. Um, and we also applaud the fact the current government has taken this
work and run with it and, and taken it further.
So it's really positive.
One of the most damaging things for the sector is, it's a sector that
invests in expensive long run infrastructure, you could almost call
it.Um, one of the worst things for it is, is flip-flopping government
policy as governments change. So we need long-term planning and
consensus on the key issues. Um, it looks to us from the outside that there
is a level of agreement there, and I hope this is, this is the case in
reality. Um, and my third and final point is to make sure that
the overarching goals of this reform aren't undermined by the detail and
implementation. It's important that the intent of this bill is
delivered, and, it, while it's important that communities have
control over how our towns and cities grow,
there's gotta be a balance between that and providing sufficient
housing, for areas of growing demand and, and of course, for our young
people. Um, and I, I'm
talking here when I, I think about this, things like development contributions for
example, which on the one hand, good, 'cause they provide essential
funding, but on the other can be used as a lever to sort of constrain and
control, development that takes place, can
act as a brake on the ability to new-- build new houses and add
considerably to the cost. So that's one area we'd love to see central and local
government work together to deliver a funding mechanism for the necessary
infrastructure, but that's fairer than just putting the cost
or, or most of that cost or a large chunk of it on the first person to buy a new
house. Um, in our submission we talked about other areas where
perhaps the law could be tightened up and as I said again, we're not lawyers,
but these were just suggestions, you know, such as binding statutory
timeframes with consequences, if they're missed, and
po- potentially naturally-- nationally standardized provisions as
the default with a high bar for bespoke local
departures from those provisions.
Um, there may be other areas which could be tightened up to make consenting faster
and less costly, while maintaining
standards. Uh, we just ask you to keep this in mind as you progress the
bill. Um, that's all from me, my speaking.
I'm happy to take questions, and I commend you all for your
work.
Look Matt, thank you very much, for that very helpful
submission. Um, lots to consider there.
Look, we'll go to a question, and we'll go to Cameron Luxton
first.
Thank you Chair. Um, thank you Matt for this submission.
I mean, you know, there's been reports come out recently about the huge amount of
benefit that, the, the property investors, of New
Zealand provide, and it sounds like what you're saying and, and I think
we heard explicitly that restricted development lifting prices isn't helping
anybody, let alone property investors, and actually having a functioning
planning system is what's needed.
Yeah.
But I'm interested in these obstacles that you've talked about.
Could you, could you explain in your, you said in your travels you've
talked to, people who want to do developments but have been held back, what
obstacles are there? And one of the ones you specifically
mentioned was, development contributions being a high
cost. And so my sup-- on, on the original question about
obstacles, and I'll ask it now is, do you see any benefit from
the amendments that are being put through on the infrastructure funding and
financing bill or act? Sorry.
Um, I'll, I'll address that one first.
I, I don't know the detail of that bill.
I have to admit I haven't read that in detail, but I absolutely agree with the
intent and thrust of that. Um, definitely
finding different ways to, provide funding for the infrastructure is a real
positive, and we applaud that approach.
Um, and there have been other suggestions.
I think at the last election there were some policy ch- suggestions around shar-
sharing GST, for new housing. Um, that's not
a bad suggestion either. I'm sure there are other ways of doing
this. In terms of specific things,
sometimes it can just be very nitpicky things at the
local council level, and I won't name specific councils
here, but some of the sort of activities are an
investor, of ours who demolished some old
really life expired sort of properties and wanted to build new
properties, single bedroom apartments,
to replace what was there. And they were told by the council that they
couldn't do that. They couldn't replace, what
was there with s- one room apartments, and these were
the apartments that actually met the demand.
The developer, the, the, our member had actually done the research.
They had to replace what was there
exactly. So they had to build a two-bedroom apartment as well
as another couple of one bedrooms.
There were various other elements of that particular development that
added cost. Um, some of it was around
trees, some planting. Um, but that's
just one example. Um, I have another member, this is one who
has said that they are now looking at restarting a project.
Um, and again, it was rules
around, um... I'm trying to remember this correctly.
It was, it was to do with the proximity to a footpath, I think, and also certain
rules around, verandas that had to be put on a,
a property, in this area. Again, they
could have knocked down an old weather board house and replaced it with
new, you know, modern, double glazed, all of that sort
of stuff, and that's a development that's just got stopped in its
tracks. So I get lots of these stories around the country.
Can't remember them all.
Yeah.
Um, but they're there. So anything that can be done
to, to streamline that and to remove those obstacles would be fantastic.
Okay. So if I may supplementary to that-
Yes
... Chair. So, so would, would the Property Investors Federation
be in support of effects outside, the scope of this
act, being persons exercising performing functions can have regard
to the internal or external layout of buildings, and
having that put in this new act will see more homes being built that
New Zealanders need?
Yeah, we would support that. We want more homes to be built that New Zealanders
need. We're not scared of this. Um, you know, we don't rely on a
shortage of houses to, to run a
business. What we rely on is having a good solid
supply of houses and operating our businesses efficiently,
and, and attractively to our customers.
Thank you.
Um, Matt, I might just jump in and ask around regulatory relief
because it's come up, many times on this committee through the
process. I'd be interested to get the perspective, I suppose, from the
property investors, and I suppose what you're finding,
you know, when you're obviously, from a property
owner's perspective.
Uh, yes, that's something we absolutely supported, the idea of
regulatory relief where, they pr-
where the, the,
controls impose significant burden, I think is the wording that's
used. Um,
yes, that is actually really important.
There are a lot of people who put in a lot of money, to get
projects up and running, and sometimes unnecessarily, and we would
like to see something that really
focuses the mind of the planning authorities
on what they are doing and the costs that they are imposing.
So that is one of the things we
absolutely support.
Yeah. Okay. Look, thank you very much Matt.
It appears we have no further questions, but, look, a really interesting
submission. Um, appreciate your time on it and, coming before the
committee today. So, thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Appreciate the time.
So members, that draws us to the end of our morning
session. So we will now, break for lunch and resume
at twelve
thirty.